Okay, so before I get to the question that I've seen here, let's look at how normal threads are created in a process. So the main function is create thread. So here's create thread. So create thread returns a handle to the new thread. So I need to capture that. Let's capture that using a variable. Let's call that H thread here. And so let's call that H value. And so let's look at the parameters. The first one is the security attribute pointer, which again, I'm going to just put as null. This relates to some default security, and we'll get to that structure later on in the next model probably. And so next comes the stack size parameter. This is the stack size I mentioned earlier. If I'm using zero here, it means I want to get the default as they are written in the PE file. So the default of the default is one megabyte of reserve memory, from which one page for kilobytes is committed up front. And the rest is going to be committed as needed if at all. So let's keep it with zero for now. Next comes the most important parameter which is the thread function. So let's call that my function is fine. And so this function of course has to have a specific prototype which I'll show you in a moment. The next parameter is called parameter which is whatever value I want to pass to the thread function. So in many cases the thread function needs some context, need some data to work with, so I can pass along some information there. And so for this first demo I'm going to pass now, saying I don't have any special information to give to the thread. And then we have a bunch of flags. So only two flags are supported. One of them is create suspended, which is very similar to the one we've seen briefly with create process. It creates the thread in suspended state. So it doesn't really start execution, but everything is ready. And so the thread is ready. The stack is ready. It's just not executing code just yet. And the second parameter that is possible is that stack size is parameter is a reservation. This is a really poorly named variable or constant. And this specifies that this 0, which should not be 0 in this case, is the amount of reserve memory rather than committed memory. So in this case, I'm going to stick with 0. There's nothing special here. I want the threat to execute immediately and see if I'm using the default stack size, then the other flag doesn't make any sense. And then the final parameter is a pointer to a double word. So this provides me the thread ID, the Unix, whether it did that is going to be assigned to this new thread if this succeeds. So I need to issue created the word value here, which is just a 32-bit unsigned integer, and then give the address of that variable to create a thread. And this parameter, by the way, is optional. So if I don't care about it, I can just go ahead and put another there, which means I don't care what the thread ID is. I can, of course, get that later using some other API, such as get thread ID. So this is very common to do also. And so let's look at the my function here. So my function must be prototype like so. It must return a d-word value, a 32-bit unsigned value. It must have the standard coding convention, which is important for 32-bit applications. And so this must have the standard calling convention. And because the default is the C calling convention, this is the other calling convention. And this is in fact the calling convention for most of the windows APIs. This has to do with who is responsible for cleaning the stack. And for standard calling convention, the cleaner is the function itself. Whereas and for start calling convention the cleaner is the function itself whereas in the C calling convention the cleaner is the color itself so the color makes the color and then cleans up the stack and there's a reason for that but I'm not going to go into that right now and there are many macros that the Windows API is decayed, that the header is provided, one of them is called WinAPI, which I've used here without me even telling you about that. Here is the signature for deal remains, also using the standard coding convention. And so WinAPI is one of these macros, there's really many macros that mean exactly the same thing. Call back is also the same thing. API entry is also the same thing for whatever. He's circle reasons. There were many constants and each one has its own popularity, I guess. And so we need to use one of the more popular. So I'll stick with that one. In any case, it should be the standard calling convention. And then the parameter I can get here is that context parameter, which is pointer to some void value. Let's call that parameter. And this is the thing that I passed along here. So in this case, I passed null. So parameter will be null once this thread starts execution. But on a different case, I would provide some pointer, perhaps to a data structure that has more information, so the thread knows on what it has to work on. Because this possible to create multiple threads, that are running the exact same function that's totally fine. So what can we do here? So we can do anything really. So in this case, I'm just going to print out some information as the first example. So my-- let's call that thread ID. Let's display the thread ID. In this case, I'm going to use the function called get current thread ID that returns the thread idea of the current executing thread. And I can also do that in the main thread as well, just so we can compare. So I can say main thread ID, this is the first thread in the process, let me display what the thread idea of that thread. And then just to simulate like the thread has really lots of stuff to do, I'm going to sleep for three seconds. And then I'm going to write something like all that. And return some value because every thread must return a value. This is the exit code of a thread. So it can be used and I'll show you in a moment how to do that. Let's return the very famous value 42. So once we call that, create thread function, what happens next? So create thread returns almost immediately and my code here continues to execute on the initial thread. At the same time, this my function function is going to execute on a different thread. So just to simulate some work and say, hey, doing stuff on main thread. And let's sleep for a second. So let's assume that eventually we're doing things concurrently, so the main thread and the other thread are working at exactly the same time. And now I can't really go wrong without getting the result from the other thread. And so I can use the same function we used earlier, wait for single object, we use that with a process, but it can actually be used with a thread handle as well. And for a thread, the meaning of signal also is terminated. So when a thread object is signaled, it means it's done, it's terminated. So I'm going to wait here forever, but of course it would not be forever because that thread has things to do that are bounded. And so when I get to this line, it means the thread exited. And so what I can do here is get that exit code out of the thread. That's returned value from the thread. So let's just use another function which are similar one I mentioned in the case of a process that's get exit code thread. I'm going to provide the handle to the thread and the pointer to the viewer to fill. Then I can safely say final result and I'll just display this value and to be a nice citizen I'm just going to close the handle to the thread properly. So that would be our first example. Let's see what that looks like. So I'm going to build that. Let me make this project as a starter project. And let's just run this. So if you just run it without the debugger, this is what it looks like. So the main thread ID had an AD of 14, 90, 84 and it printed some text and then thread ID, this is our work-lift thread, had this particular ID and it's finally done and then final result is 32, 42. and then final result is 32, 42. So what can we learn from that? So notice that main fed ID appears first. This makes sense because it's here. It's the first thing that happens. But then we have doing more stuff on main thread and that appears before the printout of the worker thread ID. So this is actually a race condition here because it could be the other way around because we don't know how low my tags for the create thread to actually launch the thread properly and start executing this function. So in this case, this call was made fairly quickly before this call started to sort of do something. And this is very typical because creating a thread does take some time. It's not it's not zero. So while the thread was being initialized, the stack was allocated all these things. In the meantime, this print have continued execution. So we got this sorry this output that shows that this text was first. But in some other cases it could be different. So we can't really know for sure. What we do know for sure is that this all-done message is definitely going to be before the final result of 42. That can never change. That is deterministic because we're rating here until the thread exit. Once it exits, it means all done was already printed. And so the next thing to print is the exit code and it will always be after all done because the thread is done. Okay, so the whole thing here ran for about three seconds. Because three seconds we spent here, then we spent here one second that overlaps with these three seconds. And so the longer time it's three seconds because we're waiting for the three two terminates. So it took about three seconds to run all these things, even though part of them of this code ran concurrently. So this is my function running on a separate thread of execution. So let's try to make this example a little bit more complicated. So the question is, how do you know which thread is running by which CPU core? So technically you can know that but really what do you care? It doesn't really matter or process all the same so you don't care. This is part of what the schedule does and you need to trust it to do the right thing. And so we don't care on which process solved, the thread runs, although we can control that to some extent using something called affinity, which we'll discuss later in this module. So let me just make this example just a bit more complicated to show some more ideas. So let's say I want to provide a thread with some data. So I can create a structure, let's call that data, let's add two variables here of type integer and then let's have a result here. And so my idea is that I can create a thread and provide that thread an instance of data and the thread will calculate something based on the data and return the result as part of that structure as well. So let's say I want to calculate the product of x and y and put that in result to do whatever calculation on a separate thread just to show an idea. So I can say something like here's data. So I can say let's put in x, let's say 7, let's put in y, I don't know, 6 and then I can provide the thread with a pointer to this variable. So it has access to this data. And so now my function here has this parameter which we haven't used. But now I need to use it. So I need to cast it back to what it really is. So I know it should be data because I've written this application myself. So I know what I'm passing to that thread. Otherwise there's really no way to tell what's inside that Vod pointer. So I need to cast downcast this parameter to what is actually there. Okay, so this is one way to do that. Of course, I have to use the pointers here. I'm I've done some C# coding lately. No pointers there. So now forgive me for that. And then let's say that after three seconds, we're doing this crazy calculation, saying something like data, result equals data, x times data, y. That's the big thing this thread does. And that's it. So I'm changing the data structure. And so if I now run this, the result after the thread complete of course should be part of my data structure. So I can say something like result and I'm going to display the value of d dot result. Okay, because it's the same structure, I've sent the same pointer to the thread. So if you run this and see what that looks like, we can see that eventually after three seconds, we get the proper result, which is 42. That wasn't intentional. That's just seven times six. That really wasn't intentional. Sorry about that. I wanted that to be a different number. So let's multiply something else. And so we'll get seven times eight, which is 56. So the final result is still the same value return from the faction, which in this case I don't really care about, because the real result is part of the data structure I sent. Okay, so this is a way to provide to a thread more complex data. Because if it's possible, I can create several threads that running the same function. Okay, so I can do something like this. But I can prepare different data for each thread. And so it is completely fine to define another data structure here and let the two have different values. So I'm going to pass the second thread a different data structure. So it's going to work on different values, but they're still completely different threads. So they're going to run in exactly the same time. They each have their own stack, the fact that they're running the same function doesn't really matter. Okay, it's not the point. Okay, so there's a question here which I should address I guess. What do I recommend using create thread or C++ thread? So I guess you're referring to the thread support in C++ 11 and later. And in this case, again, it really depends on what you're trying to do. If you're writing cross- platform call and that's important, I would use C++ threads as much as I can. If you're targeting Windows, then create red is better. In the sense that you can control things that you can't on in C++ threads. For example, in C++ threads, there's no way to change priority or with red. There's no way to change the stack size of a thread and stuff like that. So if you need more control then the Windows APIs are always superior. If you need more portability then the C++ standard library is better in that regard. But really eventually it depends on what you're trying to do and how important are these configurations that you need to do. how important are these configurations that you need to do. And so the threads are concurrent. Let's see how we can handle that. So in this case, we have two threads here. So this is wait for single object. That's not good enough. I want to let's say that I want to wait until both threads are done. So the way to do that is first to create an array that holds these handles. And this is needed because I have to provide an array to the next function I'm going to call so they have to be a consecutive in memory. I can of course, I could of course created that array right here but let's just do it like that just to not to mess too much with the existing call. And then I'm going to use the wait for multiple objects function. Where I the wait for multiple objects function. Where I can wait for multiple objects. In this case, I have two handles. So the count would be two. Then we have the array of handles. And then I can wait for all of them, or just one of them. In this case, I want to wait for all of them to be done because I need to sort of collect information from all of my threads. And then the amount of time I want to wait, again I'm going to wait an infinite time. So I can say something like result one is that, but result two is also must be available at this point because of a weight until the thread is done is going to be d2.result. Okay, so if I run this, we have here now three threads executing this process that I've explicitly am aware of. So the first one is the main thread, which was created by the kernel not by me, but then I created two threads running this same code. Notice it's the exactly the same code, but then I created two threads running the same code. Notice it's the exactly the same code, but the result is different because they're working on different parameters. And I really know idea which one would kind of finish first. Again, there's a race here, because create_read is called in close succession. So I have no idea who finishes first and really shouldn't care, because what I care here is that I need to get the results only when these threads are done. And this is a way to wait until these threads are done. And so these are simple examples yet, but these are the basics and we need to get familiar with the basics as well. So if there are any questions about this code, please feel free to ask. One of the exercises that you have at the end of this module is something that allows you to create multiple threads to make some calculation. Let's say we have a range of numbers and I want to calculate all the prime numbers in that range. How would I do that? So I can technically create several threads and then give each thread a chunk of the numbers. And then they would run concurrently and I can finish the calculation earlier than if I would be using a single thread. So that's a good exercise to sort of work through. And if you are inclined to do some programming, this is something you should try when we get to the exercises. Okay, so if there are any questions about that, so can we pass more than one parameter to a function or a thread function? The answer is no, you cannot. And so the best thing you can do is do something like this. You want to create a structure as big as you like and just pass the pointer to this structure to the instance to the thread. So this is kind of, this is the prototype that you have and it is what it is. So you can out there's no way to change that. But because we can pass a pointer, we can pass technically anything, even though it may be less convenient and passing straight up parameters. This is something that, by the way, can do with C++ threads. But I digress. Okay, so there are other questions here that we try to answer some of them. So create remote thread is very similar to create thread, but it has an extra parameter, which is the process in which that thread should be created rather than the current process. But this function is not really that easy to use because the function that need to provide here in create remote thread should be a function that has that makes sense in the target process. So it should be there already. So if it's a function in my process, it means nothing. That address in the other process belongs to something else, maybe nothing. And so it will typically crash the process. So you need first to make sure that you're running something that you know exists in the other process. And we will use great remote space for injection over DLL sure that you're running something that you know exists in the other process. And we will use create remote threats for injection over the other and I'll show you in module five how to do that and why we can use create remote thread in that case because we know we would be able to know for sure that particular function we're targeting is actually there. Okay, so that's about to create a remote thread. What else? Let me scroll a little bit. Okay so there is the sub ESP here that Angelo asked about. So sub ESP comma something, just a trick to allocate local variables. That's it, because local variables are no more than just stack space. So the quick way to allocate them is just subtract the stack pointer with the size of these variables. That is it. And so whether the memory is committed or not, that would be decided once you actually access the variables. And then if it's committed, it just works. If it's not, then it means it's probably a guard page. And then the manager will commit that page and move the guard page further. So we don't really need to kind of worry about that. Yes. so here's the way from multiple objects again. Need to provide an array of handles and the number of handles in that array. And again, this function will be discussed in more detail in the next module. We haven't really discussed waiting in detail, but we do need to use it from time to time. So I'm showing you how to do that. But again, a full discussion is going to be happening in the next module. Okay, so I think this is it. So this particular example that you see in the slides is just an example of creating a single thread, very similar to what I've shown you right now, and then waiting for it to finish, and then getting its return or exit code using getxit code thread. Now, by the way, do you know what happens if I call getxit code thread, for thread that hasn't terminated yet? Or for the same thing about a process, if I call getxit code process, thing about the process. If I call get exit code process and if the process is still running, what am I going to get in the exit code? Anybody knows? So, curiously enough, this function doesn't fail if you call it on a process or thread that is still running. What you get in your exit code is this value called still active, which has a particular value. So, it's called start to spending in the kernel, by the way. And this is the value is 259 decimal or 103x. And so this is what you get if you try to call get exit code predicate, it's called process for a further process that are still alive. Just to know. OK. So next, let's discuss the thread priorities. So we look at priorities first, and then we look at how scheduling works based on that information. And so thread priority has been between 1 and 31, 31 being the highest. Technically, there's also a priority zero, but priority zero is zero for thread called the zero page thread, which we'll discuss in module five. This is a bug in the slide, it's actually should be module 5. Sorry I'll eventually send you an updated slide deck with some fixes, don't worry about it. So technically the allowed priorities for normal threads is between 131 and fortunately you can't just set a thread priority as just some number between 131 and be done with it. The Windows API doesn't allow you to do that, it has some skin where you are more constrained in your selection or choice of priorities. So on the kind of side of things, you can select any priority that you want, and nobody can stop you, but in use mode using the Windows API, you are being constrained. And the constraint is that there is something called the base priority or a priority class, which I mentioned at the beginning of module two, which is a property of a process. And then the threat priorities can be somewhere around that base priority. So one of the priority classes that we have is called the real time, and for that to work, you need to be at the mean level. So process match, match run, without mean privileges to have its priority class being in the real time range and we've seen why in a moment. So the threat priority is something you can change around the base priority. There's a default, but you can play around with it a little bit using some offset, which I'll show in a moment using a nice diagram. So technically, how do you do that? There's a set priority class function you can use in code to change your own or some other process-based priority. And then you can specify the offset or the thread priority in relation to that process using the set thread priority function. So if you go ahead and look at task manager for instance, if I go ahead and right click something, there's a set priority here, and you can see there are six levels here. These are the levels I'm talking about as the base priority. So the base priority is really one of these six levels that I can change. And so each one of these levels has a value attached to it, which I'll show in the next slide. ProseX has the same functionality, This level has a value attached to it, which I'll show in the next slide. Prostic Slow has the same functionality, but it also shows the actual numbers that are represented by these values. If you look on the kernel side, there's a function called kz priority thread and kz base priority and essentially this functions mean I can change the priorities to some absolute value between one and thirty one and that's it so nobody cares about the process as anyway but we are in many cases working in user mode so it's worthwhile understanding what kind of priorities we can use in user mode so here's the diagram to show you what that looks like. And so we have several, we have six priority classes or base priorities. The base priority, which is the default is called the normal priority class. And for that, the value attached to it is eight. So every process you see here that has normal zits priority class, the base priority of all its threads is eight. So actually not everyone, but most of them. Some of the special processes such as CSRSs actually shown normal, but they're not really normal. So let's just disregard those. But most processes have the normal priority class class which means that every thread in those processes has the priority of eight Now if I wanted to I can change that priority using the set for the priority function to let's say nine or ten or Bring it back down to seven or six or use two to 7 or 6 or use two saturation values 15 and 1. So in essence I have 7 values only that I can use for specifying a threads priority around that base priority. This is what I can get using the Windows API. So the set thread priority doesn't accept an absolute value tag That it accepts a constant which is a relative thing. So we have seven constants there. One of them is called a thread priority normal, which is the base. Then you have a board above normal, which is plus one. And then you have highest, which is plus two. And then you have below normal, which is minus one from the base. And then lowest. and then you have the two extreme values called saturation values, which have the constants time critical and idle. So this is what you can get with a normal priority class. If you're working with an above normal priority class, the same idea applies, but the base priority is different it's 10 rather than 8. And so the same rules apply you can have plus 1 plus 2 minus 1 minus 2 in the two saturation values 15 and 1. And if you change the priority class from normal to a both normal for some process for instance then the thread thread priorities jump, maintaining the same offset. So if the thread was in priority eight, it's going to be 10. If it was nine, it's going to be 11 and so on. And so the offset always is maintained. But the base priority changes if you change that priority of that process. So same goes with high, the base priority in high is 13. So you can get to 14.15, 12.11 and two situation values 1 and 15. So in case of the high priority class we actually have only six values possible because you cannot go above 15 and explain why in a few minutes. And so you have these six values. If you go to below normal, same idea, but the base priority is six, but same rules. And then you have the idle priority class, which task manager mistakenly calls low, but this is the same thing. Task manager always does what he wants and calls everything whatever it wants because Task Manager is written by the kernel team and other applications are written by external teams to the kernel so Task Manager does whatever it wants such as hiding the memory compression process or calling the idle priority class "slow". Anyway, for is the base value for the idle priority class and we have the same rules with the offsets. And finally we have the last priority class which is called the real time priority class. It actually has a base priority of 24 but you can actually use the API to get all the priority values from 16 to 31. values from 16 to 31. And so the thing is that eventually as far as the kernel is concerning, does it really care about all these priority classes and all that stuff? It only cares about the final number. And so let's see, let's take a look for example with a number eight. So number eight priority eight can be obtained by three ways. You can have a normal priority class with plus zero is offset. You can have a high above normal priority class with a minus two offset or you can have a below normal priority class with a plus two offset, all resulting in the value of eight. From the current perspective, they are all the same of 8. From the current perspective they are all the same. It doesn't care from which process it came from. The final value is 8 and that is 8. So Nick what you're asking, the norapriority class, protease set to 16 is not really possible. You can't get to that with norapriority class you can only get to 15 no more normal priority class, you can only get to 15, no more than that. Okay, so the final value is the one that matters. It doesn't matter how that value came to be. Yes, so definitely, definitely correct. So the final value is the one matters, not the priority class, so I can use normal and raise to 15 and I can use high and decrement to one so who is stronger the 15 is stronger and so the priority class is just a scheme the windows API provides So that we cannot break out of some boundaries So this real-time range is special in several regards. One of them is that many kernel threads that belong to the kernel do some useful stuff for the system run this priority. So it's, it's we have very bad idea to run our own threads that consume lots of CPU in this range because we made into fear and still CPU time from kernel threads. And by the way, kernel threads and user threads are the same in terms of scheduling. Only the priority matters. It doesn't matter if it's running in kernel model or user model. And so if you want to get to the real-time range, you have to be an administrator because of what I've just said. And so for the administrator, it makes sense that there may be some cases where I do want to be there. For example, if I need to do some quick responding to some hardware device or stuff like that, so I want to have the best possible chance to get notifications earlier or sooner rather than later. So I can try to use the real-time priorities. And so just that you know, so you know the term real-time don't take it literally. Windows is not a real-time operating system. You should consider the term real-time here is just saying higher than the rest. That's it. So Windows is not a real-time operating system as it's usually defined. Windows is not a real time operating system as it's usually defined. Windows doesn't have any constraints on latency, for example, handling into RAVs or stuff like that. It can't really do that, because Windows runs on so many types of hardware, there's no way to guarantee such things. So real time operating systems, usually run a very constrained, well-known hardware, so they know what they're running on, so they can make certain guarantees. But Windows is a very general purpose operating system running with all sorts of hardware cannot make such guarantees. So the return range is really saying, I'm going to do the best that I can, but there's no guarantee either way. There's other differences between the normal priority area to the real time priorities. So another one is the fact that the normal range, the priorities I set there are dynamic. It means the kernel and some others, in some cases drivers, can increase the priority temporarily. For various reasons, which I will discuss later on. But in the real time range, once you set a certain priority, it will never be touched by anyone. And so you have some predictability there. And so this is why we, if we look at two such as forces explorer and we take a look at some set of threads here, then we see there's base priority and dynamic priority. So base priority is the default all the ones set by the developer using the function set with priority. The nine priority is the priority right now because someone decided to boost the priority a little bit temporarily. But if you look at the real time range, the base priority and the nine priority and all should always be the same. There are never different because no one's going to change the base priority in the range of 16 to 31. So that's yet another difference between these two ranges and there's actually yet another difference which I will not describe right now. So this is sort of the cheat sheet or the table of how priorities can be set from using what of course. So just to summarize, from user mode we have these six priority classes, each priority class has its own value attached to it. These are the values I've shown in the previous slide. You can use process explorer to actually see these values here. So if I'm going to set priority here, we can see the values attached to the actual values as sorry to the names so they're easier to remember and there's another special thing here which I will discuss later called background mode which we'll look at later in this module and so from the user what perspective we have to follow these rules but from the cannot view the idea of base priority of a process doesn't really exist there in practice. So the scheduler that does eventually the decisions of which threat to run now, which threat to run later, doesn't care about processes. It only cares about threats and their attached priorities. And so it also means that if I have one process with 100 threads, all the priority eight, and there's another process with a single thread with priority eight, and all of these 101 threads want to execute from the point of view of the kernel, there are 101 threads that want to execute. And so it doesn't give any special consideration to that poor thread coming from that process where that thread is the only one. So it doesn't matter as far as the scheduler is concerned. There are 101 threads that want to execute and if all else is equal, then they all will have the same amount of time to execute. And this brings us to background mode, which I mentioned just before. So how does a schedule keep track of threat? So we haven't discussed scheduling yet. I will discuss that in a few slides, so bear with me. So first I want to discuss something called the background mode. So background mode is a way for thread or process. You can set that on a process basis or in particular thread basis where I'm saying, hey, I don't want to consume too much CPU and some other things like IO and memory in some sense. So the idea is suppose you have an antiv and memory in some sense. So the idea is, suppose you have an antivirus software in your system. And that antivirus software now decides to scan the system. So it's now going to read lots of files and do some processing and whatever. And so what you expect this process to behave, you expect it to behave nicely. So if it's going to take too much CPU time and too much I/O and so on, that would be bad experience for the user because I am as a user. Now focused on working with, let's PowerPoint and not care about that scan being done in the background. So I expect the scan to have some lower priority than my own applications that I care about. So you may think one way to do that is just to reduce the thread priority of the threads in that particular background process and that would be good enough but it's not necessarily good enough because in many cases some such application perhaps uses IO and if it uses a lot of IO then thread priority doesn't matter much because it doesn't use much CPU at least at some times some points in time in its processing it's using IO and that IO may be into a thing with other IO that I'm doing because IO bandwidth is limited as well. And so, breadman mode says, says, really three things. Reduce the CPU priority to four. Put the I/O priority to something called "Low" and also reduce something called "Memory priority" which I'll describe in module five. So if we go back to process explorer as an example, so here is a node pad here. And let me just show the threads in node pad here. We can see the thread is running. There's a single thread right now in node pad. It has a priority of 10, which is the dynamic priority. And it has an higher priority called normal, a number priority called number five. So these are the defaults. So now I'm going to right-click node pad here and go to set priority and select background mode. And once I do that, we can see that the base priority, the entirety of the CPU drops to four, and the i-priority drops to very low, and the memory priority drops to 1. And so now node pen is going to be using at least it could be potentially using less CPU time if the system is very busy and its iO is going to be less prioritized than or prioritized as lower priority than other iO. So if I'm working with PowerPoint and setting some large file and not but also loading a file, not what is going to wait until PowerPoint is going to finish its I/O and then not what is going to be able to proceed with its I/O. And there's something else we have to do to memory again, not going to discuss that right now, to take too much time, we'll discuss that in module 5. So this is called background mode. Normally, background mode is something you can't put other threat or processes in. It's only something you can do onto yourself. You can call set thread priority or set priority class with your own handle. Then this particular values called background mode, where you can start background mode. And then later you can also end background mode. So return to sort of normal wave operation, where your priorities jump back to where they were before that. And the IO priority goes back to normal. And the minimum priority goes back to five. So this is the idea of a background model. This is kind of a nice thing the applications should use. So I expect that some antivirus scanning software or maybe a backup software, I expect them to enter background mode because it is the right thing to do. But you can't force them. So the API does allow you to force other threat or processes to do that. OK, so before we get to actual scheduling, let's consider some terms, some terminology that we've looked at briefly. And so we have the socket, which is a physical chip. We have a core, which is a separate computation unit. And then we have hardware thread, which in some cases we have two hardware threads per core. This is achieved using the Intel technology called Hyperthreading and the same idea applies and has been implemented by MD as well. And so hyperthreading is that special feature. And so what we get eventually is that a logical processor, which is equivalent to how to thread, these are the process source as far as Windows is concerned. It doesn't mean that Windows doesn't care about the fact that you have hyperthreaded cores. Actually does. And so, sketching decision actually take that into consideration. But if we take a kind of a high-level look at how many threads, sorry, how many processors I have on my system, that's going to be the logical processors of the hardware threads. So in this particular diagram we have eight logical processors on that particular system. On my system they're 16. So to make this a little bit more concrete, what are the differences between real core and the hyperthreaded or how the hardware thread? And so difference has to do with caches. Caches are super important in computing. That's because there's a large dichotomy between the speed of main memory to the speed of processors. So very, very long time ago, the speeds of processors were comparable to speed of memory. And so the processor didn't have to wait while accessing memory. But then processors took off and memory speeds are much much slower. And so if we don't do anything about that, most of the CPUs advantage with speed is going to get lost. It's going to be in the stored state waiting for the memory to respond. This is why caches were created. And so cache is just the fast memory. And on typical processors we have three levels of caches, the smaller levels that are closer to the processor are faster, but they're a smaller amount of memory of them. And the larger memory is further from the processor and their bit bigger. But still, the actual numbers are very, very small compared to main memory. You can see that level 3 cache is in fact system 1. And so here we can see the differences between the core and the hardware thread. Each core has its own level 1 cache, sorry, each hardware thread has its own level 1 cache. That's an instruction cache and data cache, but the each hardware thread has its own level one cache, that's an instruction cache and data cache, but the level two cache is shared between the two hardware threads leaving in the same core, which means that if these two hardware threads run different pieces of code and access or access different pieces of data, that would be a shame because the L2 cache will be trashed quite frequently which will force accessing main memory or the level of feed cache which is of course worse. If the level one cache is utilized most then that's the most beneficial thing we can have. So in fact if you take a look at the chip I mean at a socket and you can maybe you can guess how much of that socket in terms of area is dedicated to a cache as opposed to the rest of the stuff like computation and instruction decoding and so on. So the numbers are more than 90%, that's 90%. So most of the socket is really catch. That's how important it is. And this is why the caches are so small because they are big and they're consuming more power. So if we take a look at my performance tab here, we can see it's time statistics about the cache here. We can see that the level one cache is 512 kilobytes. But that's for my entire 16 hardware threads. So if we divide that by 16, we get a very small number indeed. And even 512 is very miniscule number compared to my 64 gigabytes of RAM. And the level two cache is two megabytes. Again, you have to divide that by eight on my system to see how much cache each core actually has. And the level three cache is 16 megabytes, which is at least three magnitudes smaller than main memory. And so this is kind of the fact of life, at least now. And by the way, you can see here that the scheduling happens on threads that kind of are inter-lived. And so this is the first core, this is the second core. Windows tries to schedule more code on core 0 and core 1. So they're using different cores and not just different hardware threats. This is one where I mentioned that Windows scheduler is aware of the CPU topology and tries to optimize that because it knows that running things in different physical cores is better than running in two hardware threads on the same core. Because of that L2 level 2 cache that's going to be a contention point. So when those nodes how to handle that? Yeah, so this is just a bad drawing on my part. It should be L1 has a decatch and i cache for each one of these hardware threads. I just didn't want to duplicate them in the in the slide itself. So each one has its own instruction cache and data cache. Okay. So all these things are very important in practice. So this is kind of beyond the scope of this course. So how to work properly with memory, but definitely you can already guess that working with contagious memory is always better. And in fact, the way that processors work with their caches, they're working in something called a cache line. So when we write a single byte, it never writes a single byte. It writes 64 bytes. If you read a single byte, it reads 64 bytes. And so if you have data which is consecutive in memory, that is fantastic because it's going to be read in the single part into the cache and then the access to the cache itself is super fast. And so, continuous memory is always, always better than spread out memory. So maybe give you another example if using C++ for instance, you may say, "Hey, where there's a vector class and there's a map class." And if you want to search for something in a vector class, vector is just an dynamic array, then it was going to be using ON complexity times. So it's linear compared with respect to number of elements. If you're using a map, so map in C++ uses binary search tree. So it's going to be working in when searching with the all log 2 of N. So logarithmic time is much better than linear time for sure. However, if the number of elements in the data structures is not so big, then the search in effect was going to be much faster actually in practice. Because of that memory contingency. So, it's a continuous piece of memory. And so it's loaded into the cache lines very nicely. And so it's very fast. And this means that some of the things we have learned in computer science and stuff like that, and it might make sense from a theoretical perspective doesn't necessarily hold in practice. And so sometimes your intuition may get things wrong. And that's why the only advice I can give you here is always just measure. If you have something that relates to performance and you have some guesses, please don't guess, just measure. There's really no way to tell what the result will be because frequently our intuition just fails us. Or maybe we are basing our conclusions on some theoretical computer science stuff which is all fine and good but in practice it doesn't always work like that. So just be aware of these kinds of things. So yet another thing before we get into actual scheduling. And this is the idea of processor groups that I mentioned briefly in the first module. And so the first versions of Windows NT supported 32 process solve, which made sense, because every processor was represented by a single bit, which kind of makes sense. But then 64 bit came along. So, the processor was represented by a single bit, which kind of makes sense. But then 64 bit came along, so the world was extended to 64 bit, that was fine, because CPU registers were also extended, it was always very good. So we got support for 64 processors. Windows 7 was the first operating system to support 256 logical processors. I don't know if any one of you has such a system in your house or something about if so you're very lucky. Of course, in any case if you have that many processors you can't it's not very easy to just extend some machine world and there will be compatibility issues with the earlier version so on so Microsoft decided to create a new term called a processor group. So each processor group can contain up to 64 processors. So if you have 256 processors on your system, then you have four processor groups. And so a thread can actually execute on one of 64 processors only that is part of its group. And so for every thread you can set a different group if you want. And then that thread is going to pick one of the 64 processors from that group to execute. So you can't really select So you can't really select one from the entire 256 process source. So this same idea continued to evolve and then Windows 8 supported 640 process source, that's 10 groups and Windows 10 supports even more than that. So it's essentially unlimited because Windows doesn't really care. And technically in the Windows 7 time frame, there was something called this "patcher lock" which was a spin lock that was protecting all the dispatcher database or the scheduled database in the kernel. And that was doing, that was causing contention because that lock was very popular if you have many processors like 16 or more. So Windows 7 saw that issue removed the dispatcher spin lock. It was done by someone called Arun Kishan, which you can also find some of his interviews on Channel 9. Then he was actually promoted, and then he was, I think, today still managing the entire kernel team. In any case, it did kind of a crazy work there to remove the dispatcher lock and spread it out to many locks, so there's no contention on a specific lock. And that allowed Microsoft to scale the window system to support many processors without having to incur that overhead of the dispatcher's pin, so that's something which is kind of an aside. So we have an API to control that and by default, when the process is created, it's given a random processor group. So if there's more than one, it's giving a random processor group. So that every process we have can kind of a primitive load balancing act. So all processors are being used fairly equally. Okay, now it's time to look at basic red scheduling. That will be the last thing we'll do today. We'll start with a single processor and I have nice animation here, which I worked hard for. Sometimes it's not easy to make these animations in PowerPoint. Anyway, we start with a single processor and then later we'll discuss some aspects of multi processing and look at the expanded algorithm, at least some part of it later. So in single processor system, the algorithm is very simple, very easy to understand. That's where we're starting from that because in general, scheduling is very complex topic. Because if you have multiple processors and you have the idea of conserving power and you have no mind, you have hyper-spreading, it's really, really complex. And so I don't really know exactly how all these things work. I know that from the RS1 version, I think when I had access to the source code and did some experimentation, but it could have changed and other factors are in there. In any case, let's look at the basics. So the idea that if you have a single process, so there's only one thread that can run at the basics. So the idea that if you have a single process, so there's only one thread that can run at the same time. And so the the simple rule is that the highest priority thread runs first and it runs for a period of time called the quantum, which I'll discuss in a moment. And if there's another thread with the same priority, it's going to run again. So instead of going through this slide, I'm going to first show you the animation, and then we'll go back to the details. So here's how it looks like. What we have here is a single CPU, and we have 7 threads that are in the ready state. And so there are 7 threads that want to run. Maybe there are 4,000 threads that don't want to execute so we don't care about those. And again, I remind you that if you look at the CPU property here, we can see there are 5,000 something threads on my system, but my CPU is about 30 something percent, which means that most threads are in the waiting state. In any given time, they're only about four threads or five threads which are actually executing code. And so the rest are waiting. So in this case, what we have in this line is a single CPU, but seven threads that really want to execute. The other 5,000 don't want to execute right now. And so there's something called a ready queue, which is attached to a processor really. And the scheduler just sort of sorts the threads based on priority. So let's assume we have the priorities that we see here. We have two threads in priority 31, one in priority 16, and three in priority 8 and one priority 7. So the first thing that the schedule does is says, okay, who has the highest priority? So there are two threads here that have the highest priority, 1 and 2. So it takes the first one from the list, wherever that may be. And then makes it the running thread. And so on the system with a single CPU, there can only be run one running thread at a time. And so this thread runs a quantum. And so a quantum is just a number. And by default, it's around 30 milliseconds on client operating systems and 100 milliseconds on server systems. And discuss more about quantum after that. And then once the quantum is done, let's say thread number one still has lots of work to do. So it doesn't want to go into the wait, so it still has lots of stuff to do. And so it goes back to the ready state and thread number two goes back to the running state. Why? Because they have the same priority. So thread 2 is entitled to having its own quantum. And once that quantum is done, then what do you think happens? And so thread number one goes back into the running state again. Thread number two goes back into the ready state. And that means that the basic rule is the higher the priority, the priority rules. And so thread one and two are going to run indefinitely, making all the other threads suffer CPU starvation if they have lots of stuff to do. Now normally threads don't run forever. They in some point go into a weight state. For example, they make an IO request or they're examining their user interface message queue. So let's assume for the sake of discussion that thread one and thread two went into the weighting state and now waiting for something. So the highest priority thread right now is number three. So it gets the CPU and is now in the running state and is running for a period of quantum. So after that quantum ends let's assume it still has work to do so what do you think would happen? It would just run again because freedom of three is the only one in its level, then it's just going to run again. So let's assume that while Fred's three is running, friend number one got what he was waiting for, maybe the I operation completed. And so what happened is something called preemption. So set, Fred number three is preented, and friend number one immediately goes to the ready and the running state. So again the rule is priority matters because thread one went into the ready state it was not ready to execute because it has a higher priority than then thread number three it preempted and the preemption doesn't happen at the end of the quantum but at the exact moment at the exact moment where the change was detected when the higher operation completed for example. And so let's assume that number one went back to the ratings date where, for number three also went to the ratings date and so in this case we have a threads number five four five and six which have the same priority, which will run in a round, round, robbing fashion, each one, getting a quantum of CPU time. And of course, these threads also can go to the waiting state and only then thread number seven can get some CPU time. So clearly, priorities are not fair and they're not meant to be fair. However, as I mentioned previously, all three priorities up to 15, what's known as the normal range or variable range get some priority boost in some cases, which I'll describe later, which will happen tomorrow. So this is the basic idea of single CPU scheduling. On top of that, we'll have to add some more complexities. So we haven't discussed the quantum yet, and we haven't discussed to its states. So we'll leave that for tomorrow. So we're kind of the end of our training for today and I don't want to keep you away from other stuff you're supposed to be doing. Yes, so the Windowsoud schedule is fully multi-threaded that is correct. Yes, so I haven't really described yet what exactly is that schedule thing? I mean what is it? Is it a thread? Is it a function? What is it? How does it actually work? And so that would be a start for tomorrow? So just to keep you sort of curious. And so with a gen for today, and I'll see you all tomorrow same time. I guess same place. Have a great day. Bye bye.