Okay, so I'm now recording and what I want to do is to demonstrate first how CPU limit does its thing and then look at the specific code. So I'm going to use a tool here, another one of my infamous tools called CPU stress. My version is 3, there was version number 1 that was written by Alex UNESCO back in the 99 and then I created version 2 which is the one that you can find with the process explorer, sorry, with the C-C-T tools, and recently I created version three. So it's nicer and has better icons. So in any case, the purpose of this tool, if you will, is to burn CPU cycles as much as, as desired. And so I can, let let's say take these two threads, make them active to their maximum level. And so now we are burning just a CPU and that's it, electricity is being burned. And so let me take these two threads, also and make them run with full speed, which means they're actually in a tight, infinite loop, just burning CPU cycles. So, if you go ahead and open task manager and look for a CPU stress, so CPU stress is right here and now consuming 25% of CPU, which makes sense because I have 16 logical processals on my system and four of them are spinning within an infinite loop. So quarter of them are fully working here. And so this is what we see here. And what I want to do is use a job with the CPU right limit to change that. To make them the process not consume mode and let's say 10% of CPU. So let's do that. So what the tool once is just the process ID and the person touch to limit. So the process ID is 4, 4, 4, 7, 2. It's here in the title bar of CPU stress, makes it easier to see. And then let's just write 10 as an example, can be anything of course. And once I do that, then we can see that the CPU stress drops to about 10%. So it's not 10% all the time. It's fluctuating between several numbers. Just remember that the task manager is only updated once per second. So on average, it's 10%. And the way it works behind the scenes, by the way, is by using a 300 millisecond windows. So windows of time. So every 300 milliseconds, if the process does too much, works too much in its CPU, then it gets robbed of the rest of that chunk so that on average, on each 300 millisecond time frame, it's not going to consume more than the CPU cycles that I wanted to. And so the application stays alive just so we can see these things in tools, but unfortunately, with, like I said, with the Prostix Plorer, Prostix Plorer doesn't show the CPU rate limit for the job. So clearly, there is a job I even given that a name, so it's easier to view, but it doesn't show any CPU and limits. If we go to the kernel debugger and try our luck using the kernel debugger, so I'm going to look for CPU stress dot x in. I should have one instance of that. And I also use the number one verbosity to find the job it's part of. It should work. Unless I misspell something. So the original CPU stress was using eight characters and S was just a single S, but that changed that to multiple S I think it's about time we get away from this 8.3 car to limit. And so here's the process. Here's the job. Let me click that. And you can see there is CPU rate control here. And so it says zero. And like I mentioned, there is a bug at Windybug. It doesn't show the correct one. I do have a tool that does know how to show these things. It's called the Job Explorer. So I can try that one. So Job Explorer shows you all the jobs in the system. It is all the jobs that I can get handles to. And then I can also see whether they are running inside the silo and so on. And I'm going to just sort by name. So here's my CPU rate control job. And here we can see the CPU rate is indeed 10%. OK, and see some other piece of information from the job. And so this is kind of at least my way of checking, making sure my applications walk correctly. So this is yet another tool that is specifically about the jobs because of those some limitations in other tools. Okay, so I guess this is fairly simple, at least from activating this functionality. So I'm going to now kill those and I can kill CPU limit as well and by the way CPU limit doesn't need to continue running for this limit to continue working. So CPU limit can terminate, it can close the handles, the job handles but that doesn't matter because the job is still referenced by the process that is attached to it and so the limit will continue to work forever until some other process is able to get a handle to the job to change it. Okay so let's take a brief look at the code, see what that looks like. And of course all the code will be made available to you and not keeping any secrets. So here is the code for CPU limit and the first thing I do here which is I guess nice in a way I'm checking to see whether I'm running Windows 8 or greater and if not then definitely this cannot work because this CPU rate controlling the narration and functionality wasn't available before Windows 8. And so this is one of those newer version functions that you should call instead of get version Ex. And so I'm using this one to return Boolean if I am not running on Windows 8. Here's the not operator here and then just bailing out. Otherwise, what I need to do is create a job object. I'm giving the job object a name. So the name is completely optional. So if there is a name, another process can open a handle to the job using that name. It will discuss object names module 4. But in this case, I just added the name for visibility. So I'll be able to easily find the job in Job Explorer, for instance. Otherwise, be very difficult to locate that job. And so this should succeed. The job is created empty. And then what I need to do is call a sign process to Job Object. This requires the handle to the job, which I already have, and a handle to the processing question. So I need to take the parameter of the process AD from the command line and attempt to get a handle to that process. And so I used the open process function that I've shown earlier, and this time I'm using these two access masks, which are called process set quota and process terminate. So why am I using those access masks and not something else? Simply because this is what a documentation states. So if you go to the assigned process to job object, documentation to say, hey, any process you want to insert into the job must have this particular access masks at least. So because I don't want anything else from these processes, I'm getting the minimum required permissions so I can do whatever I need to do. So for these handles, I can't terminate the process, I can't terminate the process, I cannot wait for single object for instance or suspend the process or anything like that. I didn't ask for it, I did ask for the minimum access mass that I really need. And that's, I think demonstrates the importance of look at the documentation. Because if you just open a process with some random access mass, it may succeed, but then a sign process job object will fail. And by the way, this also explains why you cannot add a protected process or PPL process to a job. That's because you can never get this kind of access for a PPL protected process. You cannot set quota, you can not affect the quota or the process that is. You cannot affect the amount of memory or CPU or anything for these kinds of processes. So if it fails, then I specify an error because it could be the case that I was given here, a process ID for a process I cannot get this kind of access to, that's fine. And everything goes well, I'll call a sign process with job object, this should succeed, there's really no way this should fail, assuming the process does have these two access mask which are already checked. And then I'm looping here because in this particular example I'm allowing a list of processes to be under the same job. So this is just a sort of an extension to the original lab application. And since I have a handle to the process here, I'm closing in here. Otherwise, I have a handle leak on my hands. You may think, well, that's perhaps dangerous. I mean, the job also has a handle to the process. Maybe the job will not function properly if the handle is abruptly closed. And so the answer here is that this is not really a problem because the job is smart enough to duplicate the handles so it has its own handle to the process. So you don't need to worry about these kinds of things and the correct thing to do is to close the handle to the process. Otherwise, we're leaking handles in our own process. Not too terrible for this particular application, but in general, once you get a handle, you want to get rid of it whenever you don't need it anymore. So now that we have a job and a process or more than one process, perhaps, it's time to set limits. And so the way to set limits is to use the set information, job object function. And this is a really generic function that says, OK, give me a handle to the job. Tell me, what do you want to change? This is just an enumeration. So there's a long list of values here. So if I do F12, you can see there's a long list of various type information I can change. Most of them are documented. You can see there's something here. Job object creates silo, which I mentioned, which is the way to upgrade a normal job into a silo. However, this does exist in the header files, but it is undocumented. You can see there are other undocumented values here with this generic information thing. So anyway, what I need in this case is the CPU rate controlling information. And so I specify this value. So is there anything that limits me or forbids me from just setting a very 1% usage? Yes, I mean, no, there is nothing preventing me to do that. From doing that, I can do that. Sure, it probably wouldn't be a good idea because those processes will crawl and just barely move. And if there are important processes then you may hurt yourself. So for example, if we take something like Explorer and try to limit its CPU usage to 1%, then our system will be almost completely frozen because no user interface like opening an Explorer window or using the taskbar will work. But definitely it is possible. So for each particular enumeration value, you have to go to the documentation to get a sense of what do you need to provide. So in case of job object- you need to provide this particular structure, which you can fill with the values that you need. So the first value that I'm using here is the CPU rate data member, and this says how much CPU person tells you I want to allow for this job. Now, because the API wants to be able to have fractional values, then the values are really multiplied by 100. So if you want 1%, you have to specify 100. If you want 12.5% that would be 25, 1,250. And so I'm taking the value from the command line and just multiplying that by 100. So if I have 10% that I want, I have to specify a thousand. This is how this value is interpreted and that's really nice, because it means I can, if I wanted to, use fractional values in terms of percent. Okay, so one question here which is worth mentioning briefly is this double colon syntax. This is a C++ syntax that says let's go to look in the global scope and it's not function which is a member of a class or a struct. So I typically use that for all my windows API coding which is just usually that's not a problem in terms of some collision with some member function that is fairly rare although it does sometimes happen but it is a reminder to me that this is an API function and not one of my private functions so it's not special to this application. Okay so can we block network communication by using very small values in the bandwidth? And the answer is yes. You can. Whether you want to do that or not, that's up to you. But yes, you can. Assuming you can get a handle strong enough for the processing question and be able to attach it to a job, then you can do that. If you have a job that you can control, then yes, you can do that. In this case, we need this particular structure, so we have the CPU right and there are a few flags we can use. So one of them is required really says enable, so I want to enable this thing or this limit. Otherwise, I can, if I don't specify that, then it will disable any CPU limits that is maybe have been previously enabled on a job. So I want to enable that and I want to add another flag here which is called hardcap. And this hardcap says that if I set something like 10% CPU, then I want the process, the job really, never to go above 10% if you no matter what even if the system is Completely ideal and there is lots of CPU to go around. I don't want it to have greater CPU Rate percent if I don't use this flag then this is more flexible saying hey if the system is stressed flag, then this is more flexible saying, hey, if the system is stressed, don't give it more than 10%. But if the system has CPU to spare, then let it use more than 10% CPU. So again, it gives you some flexibility in controlling CPU rate. So this is of course just an example, every different enumeration has its own structure. And then you have to read the documentation to see what that structure should look like and what each member of the structure means. And so meaning. And so everything is, of course, documented. So all the documented enumerations are documented. And so we provide here the pointer to the structure and then the size of the structure. This is it. The function returns true if everything is OK and false if something failed, maybe the parameters are incorrect or something else. So once that's done, there's really nothing else to do here. I'll just have some waiting for the user to plus enter. That's so I can run some tools to view this job. Otherwise, I will lose the handle to the job, and be very difficult to locate that again. And then I'm closing the handle to be a good voice scout and close handles as needed. So this is the basic idea. And when working with jobs, this particular piece of code just repeats itself. You can set any limits that you want by setting the correct enumeration with the correct structure that accomplices it. Okay, so this is it about jobs, if you have any more questions that I can answer now, so just type in the chat. If not, we move immediately to module number three. So module number three is about threats. We looked at processes, looked at jobs, and all these things are management objects. Now for the real workers in Windows. Those that actually execute code and scheduled on processors. Should you cast the third parameter to void? So you're talking about this pointer. So the pointer is, it's a void pointer. And so yeah, I have this crazy thing and so should you cast it to avoid pointer so you can if you wanted to but you don't need to because in C every pointer is automatically cast to avoid pointer and so it doesn't really mean much so the the idea behind a void pointer it means you can point to anything and this is in fact right in this case because many type of structures are possible parameters, so you can't be typed exactly to the actual structure. So anything casts back to void pointer automatically. So if there is a sample that casts this to pointer to avoid explicitly. That's simply silly. And this is the case in the dog. I would definitely go and get a make a pull request to remove that stilliness. It doesn't really, it's not needed. Okay. So we can move on to module 3. So we want to look at threads here. So we'll start by discussing the basic of threads, such as how to create a thread, how threads destroyed, stuff about priorities. And then we'll go over to scheduling and discuss how generally scheduling works. And then continue and discuss some more details such as what happens on the multi processing systems and some other details regarding scheduling, such as affinity, and take a brief look at thread pooling and some initial details of thread synchronization, which recover in much more detail in the next module. Okay, so let's begin. So thread is really an abstraction over a processor. So it has some management information that it owns and then there is the actual code it wants to execute, which is some function. So what does a thread own as part of its property? So the first thing is the context, which includes mostly the CPU registers. As I described in our first session, then when we have a context switch, one thread is removed from process order and other goes into the process. So then we have to save the context of the old thread in its stack. So we can resume and copy it back to the context whenever that thread gets a CPU which could be a different CPU of course. And there are two stacks per thread threads that are in user space that is. Kind of only have one stack, which is in kernel space. And I will explain the thing about stacks in the next slide, I think. So we've said already that threats can create user interface. Any threat that has any user interface is called the UI thread. It's being attached a message queue by with32k.c and then it becomes responsible for all the windows it creates. So essentially when does that really happen? It happens when the thread makes the first call from user32.dll or GDI32.dll. So the first call it makes from one of these DLS, then it gets that message queue and it's now a user interface thread and has the responsibility of pumping messages, otherwise we'll get to that not responding dreaded screen. We have an optional security token, you mentioned that already, but we will look at that in more detail in module 7. Then we have some properties related to scheduling state. One of them is the priorities. The priorities, the power of that particular thread against other thread when fighting for processors. So as I mentioned already, if we have a number of threads that want to execute and there are enough processors, their priority doesn't matter much. So they would just run and that's it. However, if the Mothwet's at one to execute, then our processor's available, then the priority kicks into action and really gives us a way to prioritize one thread over another. And we'll discuss that as the model progresses. Then we have a state. So already something we discussed are just briefly summarized and so we have three main threads to a state. Sorry to a thread. One of them is called running means the thread is currently executing code on one of the processors. So if I have 16 processors on my system, 16 threads at most can run an exactly the same time. We have the ready state, which means the thread wants to execute, but currently no processor is available for it. So it's kind of ready and hopefully very soon, you will get some processor. And finally, the third and most common really state is weight. It means the thread doesn't want to execute because it's waiting for something. Maybe for an eye operation to complete, maybe that did a slip operation, maybe waiting, wait for a single object on some kind of object which has not yet been signaled and so on. So in this case, the thread doesn't consume any CPU cycles and is not interesting in case from the schedulers perspective. And of course we have the current access mode of a thread, which can be used in model camera mode, which you already covered in the previous session. So how do we create a thread using the Windows API? So the standard function is called create thread. It's parameters, the most important parameter is just a function pointer, so function that I want to run. And once we call that function, the create thread thread function, then that thread is going to be scheduled for execution. So while there are 32 levels of priority, so this is actually completely arbitrary. But in the days of Windows NT it was a 32-bit operating system, supported 32 processors. So it seems a good idea to use 32 priorities. So there's really no real reason for that. It's just 32 is just such a nice number and was nice number at the time. That's it. So a question here in object oriented programming languages, what is the mapping of thread to a class instance? So these are completely unrelated terms. So a class instance or an object, it's just an object in memory. When we're talking about threads, we're talking about executing code. So if that object has methods, for instance, then when you method executes, it executes on some thread. It cannot execute in space. And so objects are just data in memory. That's it. It doesn't do anything. Only when we execute code that touches this memory or doing something with this memory, then it starts making a sense. Okay, so create thread creates a separate thread of execution. So we have a function now that starts executing asynchronously compared to the creator, so the one that created the thread. So they're now running concurrently in a sense. And in fact, not just in a sense, even really running concurrently if they're enough process source available. And we'll see some examples of course a bit later. Okay. So create thread, create a thread. So create thread, create a thread. Okay, so I think I explained where we are. Right, so it's all good. So create thread, create a thread, there are other variants for creating a thread. One of them is called create remote thread and create remote thread EX, which allows us to create a thread in a different process. We'll cover a common scenario for that when you look at memory management. This is the case of injecting a DLL into a target process. So we look at that, but we don't have enough information at this point to tackle that. When does a thread destroyed being destroyed? Eventually, all threads have to end. So some threads can run for a very long time. Some threads can just do very simple quick work and then be done. And so there are several options to terminate a thread. The simplest one is the function that is running the threads code, just terminate. So it says return, function says return, and that's it. And so as I'll show you in a moment, when we create a thread, there's a function. And when that function ends, the thread ends. And so the kernel kills the thread, and cleans up everything related to that thread. That's the best option when we're talking about a user mod threads. The other option is calling the exit thread function, which technically is the same thing as returning from the function because once we return from the function the entity layer that invoked our function will call exit thread eventually. However calling exit thread from within the thread function is best to avoid and the reason has to do with the case that you're working with C++ for instance and since when you call X you thread this function really never returns because you're saying well I'm done and so the function never returns and so if you have C++ objects on the stack they're destructors are not going to be called so you may leak memory or other resources so it's it's not a to be called. So you may leak memory or other resources. So it's, it's not a good idea to call x is thread explicitly. Just return from the function. When you return from the function, all the destructors are called properly and then the your caller. So the one that's actually invoking your thread function is the one going to call x is thread and that's it. So it's much better to do. And as with the case with processes, there's always a very kind of angry, violent function to give a thread that misbehaves, so for whatever reason, and that's the function-terminate thread. So you can see some similarities here between how a process exits and how a thread exits. So terminal thread, just like in the case of terminal process, can be called from outside the thread. Whereas exit thread can only be called by the thread itself that wants to kind of tell to the system that it's done. And so terminal thread can be called from outside the thread. You just need to have a strong enough handle, of course, to make it work. So it's not automatic, but it can be done. So generally, terminal thread is a really bad function to call. And the reason is that if you're killing a thread and not killing the entire process, you may be in some weird state that you can't really recover from. So let's say you have some simple code that may bring out the editor here. And I have something like a function here that runs within some thread. And that function, let's say it has some, maybe some global variables here that it can use, it says something like x equals equal to and y equals three, just as a kind of the simplest example I can give. And so suppose a thread from the outside called template threads, called template thread to the thread that runs this function. So when would that terminate happen? Would happen immediately wherever that thread is. So if x equals to ran, but y equals three didn't run, so that the sum partial thing happening here. You can't really know what happened. You don't know if this ran, if both of them ran, you have no idea. And so it's very difficult to actually recover from a third termination except for very, very specific cases when you know what you're doing. In most cases, the best thing to do in this case, if you have some thread that you know is perhaps consuming CPU or something that you want to terminate, it's best to terminate the entire process. Because this way you can start off clean. And you see something like that, which is not exactly about threads per se, but you can see something like that, for example, in the office applications. So in some cases you you see world or some other of the application just crashing. And you get this message box saying, hey, I'm sorry, we crashed, please contact support and so on. And so it is possible for a world or whatever application to actually intercept any exception that is thrown and just swallow the exception. Say, hey, well, that's OK. Let me-- let's not crash. intercept any exception that is thrown and just swallow the exception say, "Hey, well, that's okay. Let me, let's not crash." But instead, word chooses to crash because if there was some exception, something bad happened in the midst of a function. So that's very similar to terminating a threads mid-way. So word doesn't really know how much of that code has executed and what didn't execute yet. And you can get it to real travel, because maybe the case that the thread on the critical section, for instance, and then if you continue running normally, there actually be deadlock, because other threads will try to acquire the critical section, whenever succeed, because the rest of the threads called the original thread did not run and that code released the critical section, but that never ran. So it's never a good idea to kind of get out from in the middle of a function in whatever way, because don't really know what has been done and what hasn't been done. So 10 minutes straight is really a rare function. You should almost never use it in practice, but it exists, so I'm just telling you not to use it. Essentially. So what's the difference between terminated exit, thread, besides the thing that I mentioned right now, there's also the thing about theRs that we mentioned already. So I mentioned there are two reasons that DLL main is called for DLL. So actually they are four. So one other reason is called thread attach. In some cases DLRs want to know when a new thread comes up. So a new thread is created in the process because some DLRs need to allocate some memory for that to represent information about that thread. Some of them use thread local storage, so they need to allocate thread local storage structure for that and so on. And so there is this reason and there is the opposite reason reason which is thread detach. So this detached thing is not called when you are calling terminate thread. And so if some data is allocated here, it will not be free to hear which means you have a merrily on your hands. And maybe some other important stuff should happen here, but it will not happen with terminated threat threats. So that's another reason for you to avoid this function. And by the way, this means that normally all the alleles, when a threat just starts up, it now calls the first thing it does before getting to your function is actually enumerating all the alerts and calling all the other mains with this particular constant saying hey, a new deal is here. And this could be fairly wasteful because as we know, most processes hold dozens of the alerts. Now we need to call all these DLLs for every thread that is created in the process and destroyed in the process. That could be very expensive and many DLLs don't really care about new threads created or threads being destroyed and so the best practice here is to call a function that's named disabled thread library calls with the h instance of the dll. This tells windows that this particular dll doesn't care about thread creation or destruction. So you should be skipped in cases where threads are created or destroyed. So that's a good optimization to have if you're writing a DLL and you don't care about thread creation or destruction in the process you're hosted in. So just a side note if you will. Okay, so from this, sorry, the current perspective, thread are managed very similarly to processes in terms of the layering of structures. And so we have the if red structure. This is the executive thread structure. A list of those things are held in a member called thread date list head inside the e-process structure. And so each process has a list of its own threads. the e-process structure. So each process has a list of its own threads. As I mentioned, there is no global list of threads. So if you want to enumerate all threads in the system, you technically, if you're using let's say this kind of kernel related structures, you have to enumerate all processes and then within each process enumerate all threads. And so you have this e thread structure and the first number of e thread is a case thread structure which is named TCP for And so you have this eth here you can see again the logical learning something that belongs to the lower level channel that's the case read that has all the information about scheduling for instance. The priorities and the time it ran and all these things are part of K-thread, but the higher-level stuff is in the E-thread. So again, we can of course examine these structures with the debugger in a normal way. And so, I'll let you do that later on. The bank thread command can also be used to examine a specific thread, giving it a given its e3 address. And as we've seen in user mode, there's yet another structure representing each thread called the thread environment block or TB. And we've seen in the previous session that there is a bank TV command to show that data structure. And again, this data structure is undocumented and the reason it's there is exactly the same as for the process environment block. Sound information there is just easier and faster to look at from user mode and sound and the information there is really none of the concern of the current. So the current doesn't care about the information too much so it's fine to use the user mode structure directly. And so some APIs do that. So we've seen in the TAB stuff like the last error. So what guest last arrow returns is stored in the current threads tb. So when we call getlast arrow, it's just retrieved from there. And the dot actually also the opposite function set last arrow that you can set to specify, hey, here's some arrow that occurred. And this is the function that API is used when they want to report an error. So both of these functions are, of course, document. Okay, so let's look at the thread stacks now and then take a little break. As I mentioned, every user mod thread has two stacks. One of them is the kernel space, one of them is the user space. Now the thread in kernel space is the stack there is very small relatively speaking. So look at the number, they're very, very small. And there are several reasons for that. One of them is the most important reasons because the kernel stack over thread is always, or I should say, almost always in in RAM in physical memory. So it occupies physical memory immediately and there is a reason why that must be and I'll discuss that a reason later on in the next module but this is the way it is and so Windows thought it would be a good idea to limit the size of the thread stack in kind of space so that RAM is not wasted too much. This was especially important in the early days of Windows NT when RAM was very small compared to what we have today. So actually there are APIs in the kernel to increase that stack at least temporarily. In any case it's small stack, and it means that if I'm writing a kernel driver, which means I'm always running code on the kernel stack of a thread, then I should be careful not to allocate too much on the stack. So even very simple allocation, let's say I have a function here that is running within the kernel, and I'm writing something like, let's allocate 10,000 integers on the stack. That's a blue screen for you. That's a very simple blue screen, which is a stack overflow, because there is no stack space that can hold 40,000 bytes by default. We have only 24 kilobytes, a note, something close to 40 kilobytes. And so in these cases, we always allocate memory dynamically, which I'll show you how to do in module five and just throw the pointer on the stack. So it's very small there. So you might also ask why do we need a kernel stack anyway? Maybe the user stack is good enough. So one reason which I'll describe later relates to the fact that it's always in RAM. And the other reason is to make sure that user mode doesn't crash the system. So let's say I'm initiating some system call and some of the parameters are passed by registered and some are on the stack. And so assuming the system call itself on the kernel side would go and look at the parameters on the user side that could be problematic. Because the some other thread in the user address space can gobble these parameters, even do some crazy things to the parameters while the system call is looking at them, it's simply too dangerous because anything bad happening in the kernel side will cause a blue screen. So these parameters are copied by the system service dispatch handler that function copies the parameters to the kernel stack and then works on these parameters. So in if in the meantime, some other threading the user address space, garbles the stack for whatever reason, nothing bad happens to the code in the kernel. Once the code is done and the thread returns to user space, there may be an exception if the stack is garbled and stuff like that. But this would be a normal use and what exception that worst case will crash the process but not the system. So that's the importance of having a kernel stack and not just users stack. And so in user space the stack is almost unlimited. So by default it's one megabyte of reserved memory and for kilobytes of committed memory I'll explain a moment what I mean by reserved and if I want to I can specify the create thread function different numbers and so technically I can have as large stack as I need if I need it because user space is large and the stack doesn't have to be in RAM all the time. So maybe page down if the thread doesn't execute code for some time and so on. So this is normal memory that can be page in page down depending on need. The kernel stack is always in RAM except for one tiny little little reason which I'll discuss later And so the way this works is by Reserving an address range so reserving is a very cheap operation in terms of memory because it doesn't consume any memory at all just reserves a just reserves a contagious region of address space. And so that is necessary because a stack is always continuous in memory. Yes, I will describe reserved versus committed in detail in module five, but I will do so right now as well. So what is the difference between reserving and committing? When you reserve the memory, there's just an address range that you're saying, this is going to be used for some specific purpose, please don't let any neural locations fall in that range. It's like reserving your spot in a restaurant, until you get to that restaurant, then that table is reserved for you. Nobody is going to sit there. Committing means the memory is really being used. So it's being allocated by just explicitly allocated and can be accessed. So it's like getting to the restaurant and sitting at the table. Now we're actually using the table, you're using the space. And so the idea here is that comedic memory takes memory. When you access that you have to use RAM and you can it can be page down and so on. Reset memory does nothing. So accessing reset memory is the same as accessing free memory. There's nothing there. You get an exception. Accessing committed memory always succeeds because there is real memory there, you can actually use it. And so one way to manage a stack in user space we say okay let's just commit one megabyte upfront and be done with it. Sure that could work but what if the thread only needs about 20 kilobytes of stack space. So now really wasting the rest of the one megabyte. So it's not very efficient. So the way this works is that the memory manager reserves the stack, the range as a result memory, one megabyte is the default. And then commits a single page. So everything is done in pages related to memory. I mentioned that in the friend session, and we'll dig deeper into that in module 5, but it commits a single page, four kilobytes of memory. So the stack is now four kilobytes in actual size, but it can grow to one megabyte. So how does it grow? And so the next page is marked with a special attribute called the guard page. And once the thread actually the next page, the guard page also committed technically and has this particular flag. And then once the thread starts using more and more stock space and goes beyond the first initial four kilobytes of committed memory, then it triggers an exception because it hits the guard page. And that exception is called by the memory manager which commits another page moving the guard page to the next page. And so this allows the start to grow when needed but not waste any memory if not needed. Because again, resolving the memory is really nothing. It just stores some information in an internal data structure called the virtual address descriptors, which we'll discuss in more detail module 5. And that it doesn't allocate anything. So this is the way Stack-sized grows. So to show that, we can use a tool called VMMap. So VMMap is a tool we're going to look at in more detail in the in module five again because it relates to memory. What we can do here is look at the address space of a process. It's very actually similar to thing I showed you here. So I can actually look in my tool as well. It doesn't really matter for purposes of this demonstration. So I'm going to take something like an existing process like Explorer. And we can see here various types of memory used by Explorer. And one of them is about threads. And so let me just sort by the usage here. And so unusable is really unusable and uninteresting, but then we'll see a mapped, sorry, red stacks should be right here. Or maybe they're gone. Let me try with the details. It's kind of embarrassing. Maybe introduce the bug. Yes, apparently I need to do some bug in my latest version. So let me close that and use VMM. So VMM shows me when I run it, a process to look at. So let me select Explorer as well, just as an example. And here's what we get So I'll explain the details in this Application module five but in this case I want to just show you what the stack looks like so here You can see there's an area here called the stack and each one of these are stacks for threads that are within Explorer and Explorer has many thread that we already know that. And so if I pick out any thread here, we can see that we have some committed memory and then a guard page and then resiliency. So this resiliency memory is the extra space that the thread stack can grow to if needed. This is the guard part. So technically Windows uses three guard pages, by the way, not just one, but the same idea applies. So we have read right here. This is the committed memory right now for this particular thread. And this is the guard page that would trigger an increase in committed memory. And this is what is available for the stack to grow. So we can see there's 440 kilobytes of still reserve memory that we'd be able to use if the thread really needs it. So it can open any such thread stack and see the same pattern, the read write, read write God and reserve. Now remember that stack grows down and so this is the high address and this is lower address and so this is the highest address is the lower and lowest address here. So this is kind of a sort of the opposite maybe depending on your or not perspective. So read write is currently being used. So this is how stack grows in user space and that's a very good scheme so that we don't waste stack space for when it's just not needed. So how can we control the sizes of these stacks? Let's see, do we have any questions here? Let's see, do we have any questions here? Yes, that's right, that's right. So once the guard page is triggered, the triggers and exception, and the memory manager is the one catching that exception for that particular case. And then it just removes the guard page, so it moves that flag and makes it, actually doesn't remove that because this kind of exception is automatically removes the guard protection once it's triggered and then it just commits more memory and moves the guard page or pages down the stack. That's exactly correct. And so how can you set the initial size of the stack? How do you set this one megabyte or four kilobyte committed memory, how can you control these sizes. So first you can select defaults using linker settings, so that translates individuals to do to project properties and this information is stored in the PE. So we can go ahead and open a tool such as a P Explorer that we've seen already. So here's a P Explorer. Let me move that to your screen. And if I open up some executable, let's say notepad doesn't really matter. We can see there's a stack commit and stack reserve here. So these are the defaults that notepad has set for itself. So it wants the stock to be reserved for 512 kilobytes. So that's half a megabyte because not that says, hey, my threads don't need that much stock space. Anyways, let's just reserve half a megabyte. But let's commit immediately 68 kilobytes because I'm using enough stack to warrant that. So let's not just have four kilobytes and then just a page by page have the minimum manager increase the stack that just immediately go with 68 kilobytes. And so these are not the defaults. And these defaults have been changed by whoever wrote, authored notepad. And if we look at other processes, these values could be completely different. So here is Explorer for instance, let's see what's going on here. And so here you can see the values are different, at least one of them is different. And so there's their size is still selected to be the same, that's how for megabyte. But the committed size is 56 kilobytes, not 68. For whatever reason, that has to do with the one that, or thought, or at least change those properties in Visual Studio. You can also look at VMP itself. I mean, it is an application that processes nonetheless or application. So we can see it's uses the default. So Microsoft English did not change the defaults for thread stacks for its tool, for its own tool. So that's a default one megabyte and four kilobytes of committed memory. And so the first way to select a default is using these project properties settings, which are really linker flags that eventually make the way into the P header. And then we can control the stack size on a thread by thread basis using the create thread or create remote thread functions. Unfortunately, there's only one number you can provide there. So you can either provide zero, which means you're going to take a default, or you can provide a number, but this could be the committed size or the reserved size, but you're not allowed to provide both, which I think is very silly. But this is the way the API is built. And so it is what it is. And so what happens is that there is a flag parameter there, and if the flag is zero, then the value is interpreted as a committed size. If the value is stack size parameter reservation, then the values interpreted as a reserved size, but you can specify both. However, if you take a look at the native function and it creates ready x from entity L, it does allow specifying both numbers. But of course, it is technically undocumented, so we usually don't use that. However, just so you know it is possible to specify both values to override the defaults coming from from the linker from the P header and Regarding these parameter where exactly that looks like we'll see when I demoed the create with function Okay, so I think that's enough for now. Let's take a 50 minute break and then continue looking at threads. So now 50 minute break.