Okay, so I think we can begin. So I want to start with a few updates. So first, good morning to everyone or whatever that time is in your place. And so first, Anthony suggested we use Discord to have discussions offline about Windows and Dennels and questions and answers and so on. I think it's a great idea. And so Anthony, please can you share the discord link so everyone can join in. And I'll be monitoring that channel as well and Pee-chan. But a lot of very talented people here that can help with questions. And so we are a good way to share knowledge. So that's the first thing. The second thing is about the recording themselves. And so I wasn't very happy with the fact that teams records the not just the screen, but also the attendees at the bottom. This is just the wasted space. We don't really need these type of information and the quality of the video is not as good as it can be. So I'm switching now to recording using a Contagia Studio which is geared to these types of things and so I'll share the recording just the same, but that just takes a little bit more time perhaps. And I would just be recording in a different way. I want to move just to emphasize that the recordings are for you only. So please do not share them and do not pass them along. This is for your own personal viewing. And the recordings are really important because as you see we have many details in class too many to actually be able to remember everything. It's just so many details. So some people remember most, some people remember less which is completely understandable. And so with these recordings you can rewatch things that you may have missed or details you want to go over again. So this is why we are doing these types of recordings. Okay, so we're on our second day and we are in module 2. I hope you had a good one day rest and We just get started if there are any questions as usual just ping in the in the chat Okay, and so in the first module we looked at the basics of Windows looked at processes and threads and memory In it's kind of a general way We've seen how system calls are handled and all of that. We looked at WinDBag and how to operate that in user mode and using local kernel debugging. So now we're going to dig deeper into certain topics in the rest of the class. So our next module is about processes and then also about jobs. So we start by introducing some concepts in processes and how they are handled and managed in the kernel, how processes are created, how processes are terminated, and what's the effect of that. And also, we'll start discussing the various types of processes. So we look at protected processes and protected processes like we look at UWP processes and then minimal and peak processes. Because some of these processes types are not really new types but just have some unique properties. Some of them are really new such as minimal and peak processes. And then we'll discuss jobs and finally we'll take a brief look at silos, which is a brand new feature in Windows 10. Okay, so let's get started. So we know already that the process is a management containment object. So process provides isolation. That means that if something bad happens in one process, it has no effect on other processes. And so within a process we have a virtual address space, we briefly covered that in the previous module. Every process thinks it has a linear address space from address 0 to some limit, which it can use that address space for whatever it needs to do. Then we have something called the working set, which is the amount of RAM currently consumed by the process. We'll get into working sets in more detail when we get to module 5 to discuss a memory management. Okay, so manually it's a good point. Hopefully not be lost and we'll not get a blue screen. And by the way, I did send to Marco Sinovitch yesterday evening the damn file for the green screen that we got. And hopefully that will help him resolve the bug in the driver. It's actually fairly reproducible if the symbols are not already present then trying to look at the call stack eventually crashes the system. So hopefully that will be resolved sometime soon. So there is the private handle table per process, which is something we've discussed briefly also. We've seen the handle list inside Process Explorer, and we'll discuss handles and objects in more detail in module 4. Then we have the primary token, which each process has. This is the user that's running the process. This is a matter of security, what kind of operations did this user can do when accessing external resources, such as fire, or mutexess, or anything else? There's another thing that we haven't touched upon, which is called the priority class. It's called base priority task manager. So if you open task manager just briefly, we see there is a column here called base priority, which I've added. It's not showing up by default. And this base priority is the default priority for all threads within the process. So this is not really a priority for the process because the process doesn't execute threads do. But it does force a certain base priority for all threads running in that usable process. And we'll discuss the details of that in the next module and we'll discuss threads priorities and scheduling. So how do we create a process? So the normal documented Windows API function to do that is called create process, which will demonstrate a few slides from now. And this creates not just the process, also creates a first thread inside the process. As we mentioned, the process without the thread is just completely useless, or at least mostly useless. There are other functions for creating processes, such as create process as user, which has an extra parameter, which is a custom token, a different access token. So we can run a process under a different user. So you maybe Shwiller will run as functionality that Windows provides. So this is the function that is being called behind the scenes. And there's also other convenience functions, such as create process with token W, which is similar with some differences in the type of token that is accepted to these functions. And so once the process is created, then we have the main thread. So the main thread is just the first thread in the process. And it's eventually going to run the main function in the process, whatever that may may be. But eventually, processes are terminated for whatever reason. And here's why can that happen. And so one way to finish or to exit the process is that all threads terminate. So if all threads are done during the work, then we have a process without threads. And in such a case, the kernel automatically terminates the process and releases all resources associated with the process. And so this is one way to terminate the process. The other way is that anyone of the threads within the process can call the exit process function. And in fact, this is the normal way that standard Windows process has terminated. So you may be familiar with the fact that if you run, if you create a process and the first thread exits, the entire process exits. And so this may be curious because not all threads necessarily terminated at that point. There may be other threads that were still running at that time, but still once the first thread terminated, then the entire process goes down. And the reason for that is because our main function is not really called directly. It's called by the C-run time library that we linked against. And so the C-run time library calls our main function and when the main function returns it just calls the exit process function. And this is why the first thread has sort of an extra importance in normal applications because the C runtime calls exit process when it returns. But from the current perspective, all threads are the same. And the first thread has no special meaning than other threads. And so this is specifically what's happening in normal processes that we run. So if for example you're going to write a native process. So a native application that does not use the C-run time but only links against NTDLL, you will not have that behavior. And so if any of the threats is still running, even though it may not be the first, the process will still be light. But this is, in fact, the most common way to terminate the process. And there's another way to do that, which is more abruptly using the terminal process function. And so exit process can only be killed, but sorry, it can only be called by one with threads within the process. T can only be called from the outside.s within the process. Terminate process on the other hand can be called from the outside. And so it is possible to terminate some process by calling template process. This is in fact what happens if you go ahead and click and task in the detailed step in task manager. We actually call the process to terminate abruptly. And so of course it doesn't work for every process of automatically. You have to be able to obtain a powerful enough handle to make that call. But if you can, then it would work. And so, as I mentioned earlier, some processes are protected, such as CSRSS and SMSS, and we discussed protected processes later in this module. And one of the effects of that is that you cannot get strong enough handle to terminate any of these processes, not even if you are an administrator, at least not from usable. And so what's the difference between exit process and terminate process? So template process is not an orderly shutdown of the process. So what does it mean? So let's first discuss what it doesn't mean. And so when a process terminates for whatever reason, using whatever API, nothing is left from it. So it never leaks memory. It never leaks handles. There is nothing left. So the kernel manages that and makes sure that everything is cleaned up, no matter how the process got to exit, whether normally or by terminal process. The thing that differentiates exit process from terminal process is the fact that when you call exit process, then all the DLLs within the process get a notification that the process is shutting down. And so the DLLs can run their own shutdown code and for example flash information into files and whatever else they need to do. However, template process doesn't do that. So template process kills the process right then and there and dlls.get notification that the process is shutting down. So you may have some loss of information because maybe a file hasn't been flashed properly to this. And so some data may be lost. But it is what it is. So we usually use TEM in a process when there is just no other way to get rid of a process that may be consuming a lot of CPU or memory and so on. So what is that detached reason that I'm referring to? And so if you look at the DLL and we'll discuss that a little bit more later, every DLL has an entry point called DLL Main. So DLL Main is very similar to a win main function that executables have, but it's called just, it's called several times in the lifetime of the process. And so it has a specific prototype of course. So we have an H instance here which is the actual address into which this DLL is loaded inside the process. And then we have a reason parameter which is the one I'm referring to here and that's another parameter that is called reserved. It's not really reserved but it's not really reserved, but it's not important for our discussion at this point. And normally what the DLL does, it uses a simple switch to look at why DLL main was called right now. So the first case is DLL process attached. This is the point where the DLL is now loaded into a new process. That is a way for DLL to initialize itself. So you can allocate memory, open handles to whatever it needs, and so on. And then finally it has to return true from the function, which indicates to the loader that the dealer was initialized correctly, and it's ready to go. If the dealer returns false, then the dealer is automatically unloaded. So the dealer process attached is always called because this is when the dealer is being loaded into some process. The other reason here which is the exact opposite is the dealer process detached. And this is exactly the one that is not being called with terminate process. So this is the notification that is not being invoked when terminate process is called to kill a process. And this is why it's not a good idea, generally, to kill a process this way. But sometimes we know that there's just no other way to do that because the process needs to be saved in some way. So this is the basic difference between using exit process and ten minute process. So the common thing is that nothing remains of the process. All the private memory is freed and all the handles from the handle table are forcefully closed so there's never any leak. And by the way this is very different from kernel drivers. So if you look at the kernel driver for instance, if a writer cannot driver and I forget to free some memory when the driver unloads, nobody's going to free that for me and will have a memory leak that will only be resolved in the next restart. So you may wonder why that is. I mean, can't the kernel just track allocations from drivers and then free those allocations when the driver unloads? So technically it can, but it doesn't do that. And the reason is that it may be the case that the driver left that memory for a reason. Maybe it's communicating with another driver that needs to pick that memory up and do something with it. And so the kernel can't really take any chances because we know that any exception in the kernel is a blue screen. And so the kernel never cleans up after drivers. It's a driver's responsibility to clean up after themselves. However, in user mode, the kernel is responsible for cleanup processes. So there's never any leaks when a process exiting doesn't matter how that came to be. OK, so how our process has managed within the kernel? So we already seen that briefly, there is a structure called eprocess, the executive process structure, which is the main structure within the kernel, where all the information about the process resides. So everything that is ready to process starts from there. Some of the data is just in there, and some of it are pointers to other data structures floating around in the kernel. Now, the first data structure within an e-process is of type K process, kernel process. And this member is called PCB, the process control bar. So you can think of these structures as sort of layers that represent the executive part and the kernel part of what it takes to manage a process. So in the K process, there is data that is more relevant to more low-level stuff, such as memory mappings and priorities and things like that. In the E process, the rest of the structure has all the rest of the information. So it's not really a one-to-one relationship, but just will give you an idea. And all processes in the system are stored in a doubly linked list. And that doubly linked list has a root, which is a kernel variable called PSactive process head. You can also get that variable of course using the kernel debugger. And so all processes are linked using a structure called least entry, which I'll describe in a moment. And in fact, this type of linked list is very common in the kernel. So most lists in the kernel are managed through this least entry structure. So let me briefly describe what that looks like. So the list entry structure, of course, it's defined like any other structure using type depth, and then it starts with an underscore like every other structure. And then what we have here is, is least entry that points to forward that is to the next link. And then we have another list entry that points backwards because this is a double linked list and the structure is called least entry. So what's so special about it? So the way windows manages this link list is that this particular list entry is part of a larger structure. So the structure called E-process, which we're talking about now, it again is described like normally with a type def and it's called E-process without the underscore all the same. And then what we have here are data members, and then we have one member which is of type list entry. This is the member shown here, active process links. So we have this active process link here, and then we have more data members. So the list entry is embedded within the e-process. So if you would try, for example, to-- yes, of course, I will leave that code. And if you try to iterate through the processes using this list entry, so what do you get? You actually need to iterate from a list entry to the next. So we have a list entry, let's say, a pointer P. And then you want to entry to the next. So we have at least entry, let's say a pointer P, and then you want to move to the next process. So we'll go to F link and get that new at least entry. But how do you get to the actual E process structure? So you don't really care about that least entry. It's not really interesting. It's just holding the pointers forward and backwards. You need to get to the top level structure here. And so the way this is done is by using a macro called containing records. So I'm describing a macro, which is part of the Windows driver kit. But because this list is so common, many lists are managing exactly the same way. So with containing record, what you actually really need to do here, is do some point in arithmetic. And so go back and subtract the size of the data members that appear before that particular member that holds the list entry. And so containing record just gives you a way to do that by using this particular macro. So you need to provide the least entry itself, the type of top level structure, and the name of the member. And so, this does all the appropriate moving of the pointer, including the cast. And so, you get a pointer to the e-process. So, this is a very common way to iterate through a list within the kernel. In fact, not just the kernel, NQDL also uses this list. As I mentioned, NQDL is built with the kernel. So it uses the same type system. And so it uses a list entry and a Unicode string, which we haven't described that. And all these things that are used within the kernel are also used by NQDL. So this also applies. So for example, the processing environment block, and so can active process links be at the beginning of structure? Technically yes, in in process it's not. And the name of the member in other structures is different. And so it can be first. I haven't seen any structure where it is actually first, but there's nothing preventing from that from happening. And that would make it, of course, easier to work with the offsets. However, notice that for eprocess, specifically the first member is a K-process. So the first member of a K-process, over in-process is a K-process called the first member of a K process, over E process is a K process called PCV, as I mentioned, and then there are other members. So definitely the active process link is not first, that will never happen. And so the address of an E process and a K process is actually the same, because they're starting at exactly the start of this structure. So if we go to the kernel debugger here, and I showed you earlier in the previous session, that we have the process command that can show us processes within a local kernel debugging session on any kernel debugging session for that matter. And so let me go ahead and again, try to locate some instances of explorer, don't want to list all the processes out there just to many of them. And so when we look at the basic information we get the process with this zero verbosity level, what we get is these four lines and these address is the address of the eprocess. So this is the eprocess and describing right now. Because this is a kernel address, it naturally identifies uniquely this particular process. There's no way another process can have these address, because this is an absolute address because it is in system space. And so if you use the normal process command, like I did right now, maybe we can select a specific process, just by taking its adverts here, maybe showing some more information about this particular instance. So that should be just fine. But if we want to, we can, of course, go ahead and look at the actual structure. So in debug is busy for whatever reason. Maybe getting symbols. I don't know, there shouldn't be any problem here, but we know that sometimes it misbehaves. Okay, so, something, oh, my mistake, yeah. Should have put the address here and the verbosity here, sorry, my mistake. And so this is the process with this particular address. But if you want, we can go ahead and use the DT command to look at an e-process structure generally. So let's take a look at that first. So here's the structure. It's quite a big structure. And if we go back to the first member, notice it is PCB and it's of tight K process. And so this just shows you that the first member of E process is a K process. And that's actually important because some, if you're doing any kernel development, some kind of APIs want an E process, some of them are defined, requiring a K process, which you should realize these are the same thing, because they are the same address. And so the size of a k-process, we can see here, is 438 bytes hex. So it's quite a big structure onto itself. And then we can see the rest of the members. And by the way, what you see here are bits. So these are bits. You can see there's a flag two here and it's actually a C union and so in exactly the same offset you see a bunch of flags and so this is again a very typical way of storing flags on one hand you have the entire flag set as just a 32 or 64-bit number, and then you have the appropriate bits as a bit fields form in the C-Sense. OK, so the other thing we can do, we can just attach to this structure the specific address of a process of interest. So now we'll get the same members, but this time with values. So we can see the various values of the various flags here, for instance. And so here is the PCB. Now we have these links. So we can dig into the k-process instance of this particular process. And here's the active process links that points to the next process. And so I wrote a link here that's actually links. That's my bad, but you get the idea. So this is the list entry that is pointing to the next and previous process. And he can see here another thing I talked about the bit fields here. So this is the prefix 0,, which is used by windy bug to indicate Boolean bits. So it's just a bit. So we have 0x for hex, 0n for decimal, and 0y, if you will, for binary. So we can actually use that when you're using expressions in windy bug. And so technically, we can go ahead and use the same command with the same address, but look in this case to the K process structure. So that would work in exactly the same way because they are in the same location. I could of course just press that link, but we can also take advantage of the fact that they are on the same address. So this is what a K-process holds and there are other stuff here, such as here's a thread list. So notice this is the thread list that is part of this process and so it's also managed by the same list entry, the exact same idea that we're discussing here about processes. And so there are many we're discussing here about processes. And so there are many fields of interest in eprocess, but I should say, the structure, both of these structures are undocumented. So even in the kernel, I mean, when you're writing kernel code, these structures are undocumented, the windows driver kit. And the reason is that they're changing from version to version. Even an update to Windows can make changes. So new members may be added and offset of existing members tend to change. And so it's a bad idea to take dependency on the way a specific instance of E process. So a specific, a specific, eprocess looks like because these things are changing. And this is a bit of a shame. And so the only thing we can do is just work with the API that we've given in the Windows driver kit that abstract some access to processes. And so the question is, can I look at the next process using that list entry? And so it's not trivial. So if I press something like this, I get the new next list entry, then I have to do some work because what I'm really assuming is not really the next list entry. I'm interested in the process itself. So we can, of course, take the value that we get here. This is not the correct structure, but if I was taking the correct structure and then subtract the offset of the active least entry member. Because we know it's offset and then we can go ahead and do a dt again to that process. So it is possible to do, and I urge you to try that in the lab exercises later on. And so it's very interesting to explore processes using their e-process and k-process structures, because they contain really all the information there is about the process. And of course, it's not everything here. Many of these members are pointers to other structures that have more information. But this is a way to start. So the other thing that we briefly discussed in the previous session is the processing environment local PAB. So the PAB is a user-mode structure. So it's in user space, and we've seen we can get to that using the pb command in user mode when we debugging a specific process. And this structure is also undocumented. So technically it's undocumented and we're not supposed to use it. Sometimes we do use it. And the reason it exists, there are actually two reasons. One of them is to hold information that the canon doesn't really care about too much. And the other reason is to make accessing some functionality just quicker because any transition from usable to calendar mode is not free. So it does take some time to make that quantum leap into the calendar then back again. And so if you can have some functions that just access the information inside the PV, you'll be better off. So it's going to be just a quicker. Yes, so in K process, the threads are the threads of that particular process. In fact, threads are not stored in a global list They're only stored on a pair process basis So every process has a link list of threads that are part of its list of the actually two of them one of them in the K Process one of them in the e-process So threads also are managed by an e-threading K case where we will look at in the next module. And by the way, one well-known thing, technique for hiding a processing system is just take this active process links and sort of enumerate or traverse the process list and then just make one of the least entries point to the next process that skips the process you really want to hide. So some people have done that. You need to be very careful when doing that because it may be the case that while you're traversing the list new entries come in or go out and you make crash the system. So you actually need to take a lock that is also taking by any other function that manipulates this list. But it can be done. People actually have done it. And so if you do that, no tool, no task manager, not process flow will ever know that this process exists, but it does exist and it's are still executing code. So that is one thing that you theoretically can do and people have done that. I think you can find some examples on GitHub. Okay, so these are the main structures and I urge you to look at them later and I will describe some more members later on when we look at protected processes and such. So the download link for yesterday's video, it's the same one. It should be the same one. And if not, I'll check it that later. And so can you hide process from user mode? The answer is no. There's no way to hide the process in user mode. That would be way, way too powerful. OK, so now I want to discuss the major steps that are taken when the process is created. So process creation is quite a complicated piece of work. And a lot of stuff has to go into that. And in the Windows internal book, I described that. I think in about 10 pages or so. And so I'm going to try to condense the important parts of these 10 pages into a single slide. Because there are many details that are not too important, because again, I want to facilitate understanding more than just random bits of piece of information. And so when I call the create process function, what does happen? So the first thing that happens is the image file is open. So the image file, this is the term used to represent an executable or the something that has a portable executable header. And so the create process function accepts and executable. So we have to, the system has to check whether that is actually an executable. It opens the image file and verifies that it is a valid executable file. And then it can go ahead and continue process creation. And by the way, the extension of the file doesn't matter at all. You can create a file with extension, ABC, or whatever. The EXE extension has no special meaning as far as the kernel is concerned. It's just a way for the shell in Windows Explorer and all that stuff to what is the identify executable stuff. But really, the extension means nothing. And so once the image file is verified to be correct, then the kernel starts creating the structures that represent the process of first is to create the e-process structure. We've been it of course the k-process structure is created as well. And as we know, every process starts its life with a single thread, so the thread, the initial thread in the process has to be created as well. And so we get the e-red structure that represents a particular thread and a case thread within it. And so we will not look at the structure right now, but you probably guess that it manages information about that particular thread. And so all these stuff is happening still in the creators process. So the one calling create process. Because the new process is not yet ready to execute code. But at some point, the new process has to initialize itself from within that process. So we'll get to that in a moment. And one of the things that we know that the Windows subsystem processes our CSS needs to know when processes that belong to the Windows subsystem are created. So there's an LPC message sent from the creator process to CSRSs notifying it of the fact that the new process is now being created. And so we mentioned that the Windows subsystem is the only subsystem that is alive today. So, Paul is always through just went away with the door, though they say, and we only left with the window subsystem. And so, if it was a native application in one case, then CSRS will not be notified. CSRS doesn't care about native processes, those that only use anti-dLL. But about native processes, knows that only use entity alive. But for normal processes, which is most processes on a given system, CSS needs to be involved in that, and at least notify. So the creator notify CSS, that a new process has been created. Then the shift goes into the new process. So the new process now is ready enough to start executing some code within it. And so when the image file is first opened, the new process is being mapped with the image file executable and antigilas. So anigilas automatically mapped by the kernel into the new process, into the new process address face, because there's no one else to do that, because there is no user mode code yet that is available. In fact, Antidell must be there already ready to execute code. And so, once the process is initialized enough, then the load there, which is part of an TdLL takes control and does some more initialization before actually calling the main function or in most cases the C-run time main function that eventually calls our main function. And so what does the loader do? What are its purpose? And so the first thing it does is creating the processing environment block. So we may wonder who creates the PAB. So entity that does. Again, the canon doesn't care about the PAB, it doesn't care about any of that. It's just use the mod stuff. And so entity that is the one creating the PAB and initializing that properly. It also creates the first threading environment block because we know that there's a new process and the new thread. So the TV which we also looked at briefly in the previous session is also created initialized by entity l l, the loader. Then it does a bunch of other initializations which are not mentioned here. For example, it creates the default process heap. So every process has a default heap who will discuss heaps in module five. So who creates that first heap? So that's entity. Again, there's no one else present at this time. The next important thing that I want to cover that entity there does is load required the less. So what I require the less? Now when we use API, let's say I want to call the quick file function like no.pad does. So I need to link against the kernel32.dll library that implements that function. So how do we do that? So normally when I create a project in Visual Studio, what happens is that Visual Studio adds a lib file that's a small library file, to my link tab and link import libraries. And so that small file, it's a lib file. It has two pieces of information. It's the name of the DLL, such as kr.32.dll, without any full path, just the name of the DLL, and the list of exported function or exported symbols. And so entity LLL, this information is stored in the PE. So entity LLL works that list of potential DLL and tries to locate them. Every DLL that it locates successfully and I'll describe in a moment where it's looking for this DLL, it's going to call its DLL name with the DLL process attached reason. This is how it's done. So every DLL that is found is having the chance to initialize itself. So notice this happens way before our main function is called. If any other required DLL is not found, then we get this nasty message box that says, hey, something is missing and maybe reinstalling the application will make it all better. And once we click OK, the process shuts down. So this is why this is called required the alert. And this has to do with the way we link to the alert. There are actually two ways, and this is called implicit linking. So we just specify that we want this DLL at runtime, and N to DLL does its best to locate it. And then at runtime, we get a connection between our calling of functions within this DLL to the actual addresses where they happen to be in the process. And so the transition from K to user, so everything that I mentioned until the complete process optimization is done in Kano mode. So the Kano does that and then it goes to the loader and that's done in user mode in the new context of the new process. And so these are the required DLAs. Only after all these DLAs are loaded successfully and so all the DLAs are called and they return true and of course the DLAs are found in the first place only then the execution of the main entry point is called. And this is why when you look at the call stack or with ready user mode, you always see the thread starting from some entity-level function. You cannot start a thread really with your own function. There's no such thing. Entity-level just starts running some first code, and then it calls your thread. And that same goes for the initial thread just like any other thread. And that same goes for the initial thread, just like any other thread. And so where does NDDLL look for these DLMs? So these are actually the same logic that is used by the load library function, which allows us to load DLL dynamically. That is, load that at any point in time that we see fit. In this case, if load library fails, we don't get any crash. We just get a bad handle, and we know the DLL has not been found. But the rules of load library, if it's given only a file name without a full path, is the same as the rules that are used by entity_lf. So let me go briefly according to this rule. So this is exactly the order that is used to locate a particular dll because remember the lib file only has the name of the dll and doesn't have any full path. And so it needs to kind of find them. So there's a question here. Are all processors linked with KFC to the DLL? So all processors, we will subsist them. That is correct. But for native applications, that is not correct. So native applications such as SMSS and CSRSS do not need KFC to the DLL only. So the only thing that we can say for sure is that anti-dial-L is required in any process. And even that is not strictly true when we look at minimal and peak of processes that don't have anti-dial-L. But if we put those special processes aside for now, then anti-dial-L is always present. And as I said, it is mapped by the kernel itself. OK, so let's go over the various locations. So the first location is those that match the known DLL list in the registry. There's a list there that points to DLL that are so common and part of windows that they're mapped initially by the system when the system starts up so that later when they're needed the linking and loading into address spaces is simply faster. So these are always preferred to custom locations. This is something that is trying to prevent a dealer hijacking scenario. And so as we can see in the second item, second bullet says that it goes to the director of the executable to look without particular DLL. So you can think of a malicious agent that put in the director of the executable another version, for example, of kernel32.dLL. And so if it would be the first location to look at, then we could have a DLL hijacking on our hands for a very important DLL. And that would be a bad idea. And so all these non-DLLs are always retrieved from the system 32 directory. And so the second location is really the directory that's the Q2 button. This is where most DLLs should be. Most custom DLLs should be. So if I have an executable and I have a bunch of DLLs that are specific to my application, I want to put them there because it's the first-- except for non-DLL, this is the first location that N2DLL looks at. And so I want them to be loaded from my directory. And that makes sense. So maybe thinking maybe this is also a subject to perhaps Dilele hijacking. And to some extent it is. But if my application is installed in program files, which it should normally, then a program file is not accessible to non-administrative users for right access. So normally this is only done by administrative but yes it could be done. If I gain administrative logistics in some way, then I can hijack other DLMs technically. And so this is the second location that NTVL and any load library actually looks. So the third location is the system directory. The system directory that we know, it's available using the API and get system directory. And it's the system32 that we know and love. And so there are ways to prevent DLL hijacking based on signatures and all that stuff will not cover that right now. So just kind of putting it out there, you can do some Googling to get more details about that. So back to season 32 now. One of the ways that people use to write applications is by putting their DLLs into system 32. That was very easy way to have an application used in DLL because that folder is always searched, as part of the search for DLL. And Microsoft gave that term, it's called DLL Health. And DLL Health happens when you have, let's say, X.DLL that is coming with application A and stored in system 32. And then you install application B that uses the same xDLL but it's a newer version and that simply overrides the previous xDLL in system 32. And so application B runs just fine, but application A crashes or misbehaves in some way. That's a very bad idea, and the system director is really just for Microsoft. Then it's better to put your own private DLLs in the directory of the executable. Even though something is missing here, so you use something which is the ability to share DLL. So if you are using that X dot DLL, which is exactly the same version, and you put it in different directories, Windows has no idea, these are the same DLL. It doesn't check the contents, just uses the path. And so it will be mapped twice to RAM, for instance. If it would be in system 32, it will be mapped only once to RAM, and that is better. However, in today's systems, since we have lots of memory, not like the old days, then this is something we want to have. So we're kind of conceiting that we're going to lose some memory, but we gain better stability, and that's okay. So disk space and RAM are relatively cheap. So where does the gap feel all of this? So the question here from Puso, the gap is the global assembly cache for.NET. So it doesn't fit in it at all because these are only done for native DLMs. So just non-managed DLMs. For managerial Ls, the loading is done by the CLR. The CLR has its own logic. So the CLR looks in the global assembly cache if the dotted assembly is signed and all these things. So this is kind of a completely different thing because here I'm describing how the low level load library works. And by the way, if I give to load library a specific path, it just looks in that path and it'll eat the DLL is there, then great. If not, then that's a failure. So this is how the CLR uses this mechanism. It actually is not using explicitly the name of the DLL only, but uses full task. OK, so system 32 is here. Next is the 16-bit season directory that exists in Windows still. This is done for whatever compatibility is made are required. It's completely useless today. And then if the DLL is not found, the next stop is the Windows directory. So if you put something in the Windows directory, it's also going to be found automatically. The next stop is the Windows directory. So if you put something in the Windows directory, it's also going to be found automatically. And if that doesn't work, then the next item is Look at the current directory of the process. So the current directory of the process is the property of a process. Now normally, if I create a new process, the current directory of the new process is specified by the parent process. And so as a creator, I can set a default directive for the process to look for the LLS, for instance. But generous speaking, any process can change its own current directory once it starts execution, by using a set current directory function. So this is sort of a default directory for anything involving files that don't have food type. So if I even use the create file function and I'm creating a file called a.txt, just with a file name, where would it be looked? And so it will be looked at the current process, that kind of directory of the process. And lastly, the loader looks at the path environment variable. So any directory in that environment variable are served. And if nothing is found in all these long list of directories, then we get that nasty error message from entity else saying, hey, I didn't find one of these dls. It doesn't really tell you which one of them. I don't recall right now and then just to see the process crashes. So these are required dls. They are mandatory. And so we looked at how to link within the DLL and I mentioned there are two ways. I want to kind of solidify that. So implicit linking is exactly what I described now. So we're looking using a lead file and this is the simplest way to work. And that DLL is attempted to be located when the process comes up. And the DLL's job is to do that. And if the DLL is not found or fails inter-insrealization, that is returns false from its dl_make function, then the process terminates. The other option is something called explicit linking. With explicit linking, I don't provide any lib file because I want to do something which is completely dynamic, and so the loader has no idea what I'm going to do and then whenever I need a deal L I can call the load library function to load it right now and in this case if the L is not found or fails in transition for whatever reason I just get back and null handle I can do something else so the process is not crashing or terminating for that reason. So one common use of load-revering, this cases is, for example, to load the alleles which hold resources that are based on the language. So maybe I'm looking at the current system and trying to locate a DLL that has resources in that particular language, let's say I don't French. And if I don't find a French DLL then I can let's say get a fall back to English or something like that. So in this case I don't want to the process to crash. I just want to make a call to see whether a specific DLL exists and if not I can do something else. If I want to call functions within this dLL then it's a bit trickier because I cannot just include a header file and then just call the function because the compiler will say okay that's great I see that you have these functions in these header files so I'm fine and see the I see the declaration, the prototypes I'll just go ahead and insert some code that needs to call them at the linker, then has to fill in the blanks, it has to locate these functions and see if they're not present in any CPP file or C file and they're not present in any lib file so they're not exported anyway. The linker will give us an error which is called unresolved external. It says, hey, you're calling this function but that wasn't able to find any way to get such an implementation. So you can't really use the function directly. What you have to do is use a function such as get proc address after loading the dll and tell the loader, hey, here's the dll, here's the function named. So and so, please give me the pointer to where the function actually is. And then I can call the function. So it's more problematic, or I would say less easier to do, especially if you're trying to do this with C++, it's almost impossible because of the name, mangling things which are not get into. But for C style APIs, this is a workable solution. In some case, we actually do that if we're not sure. If a particular DLL exists on the system, as in the case with resource delays, but not only resource delays. For example, I'm egg writing a software, some software that uses a special feature that exists in Windows 10, and I also want to be able to run the application in Windows 7. If I just use the API from Windows 10, I will compile link just fine, but the application will fail to load in Windows 7 where that particular delay doesn't exist. And so the way to handle that is to load that library explicitly. And if it succeeds, then I can grab the function point of dynamically using getProcatteras and call that whenever I need to and not rely on the implicit linking because they can't. So some of these details require really looking at some code. And maybe we'll do that later on. So now I want to show you how to create a process using the Windows API. Even if I'm not a developer, I think learning to work with the Windows API even in simple ways is very beneficial. So to do that, I want to actually demonstrate this entire code with a visual studio. So the question is, LDR load VLL is an ATV API for load library and the load driver loads a kernel drive. So that's a different thing. Okay, so LDR load VLL is the undocumented function from NTVL that is the one that is responsible for actually making the system call. So to demonstrate that I'm going to create a new project in Visual Studio. So I'm using Visual Studio 2019 here. You can use any version of Visual Studio doesn't really matter for our purposes. So I'm going to just look at the C++ node and select console app. If you don't see a C++ node that maybe the case you haven't installed, the C++ workload from the Visual Studio installers. So go back to the installer and add the C++ workload. Also, if you use a Visual Studio 2019, you may not see this nice dialog from 2017. You will see a newer, really, really awful dialog for new applications that Microsoft for whatever reason continues to use and to kind of insist that it's good, but it's terrible. So there is an extension to Visual Studio 2019 that knows how to restore the same dialog that is used in 2017. So I use that extension, just if you're wondering. So even if you don't have your just so you can download the demo, so let's go with demo one. You can download the community edition, which is free. And just use it, it's a fully functional. It only lacks some very kind of special features that you don't really need in the standard development. So here we have a simple console application which has a single file and already has some code here I'm going to remove that code, I don't like using IO string, so we have some bunch of comments here, so we have our simple main function. And to get an access to the Windows API, we need to include Windows.8. This is the main header for most of the Windows API. But there are others in some special cases, some more APIs require more headers. And I'm going to include STBIO to have access to a simple print-if type of function. And I'm going to return void. It doesn't really matter too much. So I want to create the call to create process function. So the forget process function is fairly complex, relatively speaking. It has nine parameters. And we want to look at most of them right now. So as we mentioned in the previous session, there is no create process function really. It's just a macro and there are two creation functions create process a and w. So I can explicitly use a or w like so, which is completely fine, or I can use the macro. As I said, normally the Unicode macro is defined and so the Unicode functions are used by default and this is the way you should work always. The reason there's really almost never a reason to work with the ASCII or Anzy based functions. And so the first two parameters-- sorry, I pressed a bit button and teams thought something else. So I hope you can see my screen back again. It was a weird thing. Yeah, so I cannot press contour sheets space now because it does something in teams. Stop presenting. I cannot press contour shift space, now because it does something in Teams, like stop resending. Okay, so what we have here first are two strings and this should be the application name sort of and the command line to that application name. But mostly what we do is use the second parameter and the reason for that is because it knows how to look in those default directory dimension earlier. And so I can create a Unicode string and I want to run note that now I can just write note that here I don't need a full path if I provide that name as the second argument. And just just you know that L is a prefix that tells the compiler to translate this string into a Unicode UTF 16. And W character here is just a type there for W character theme which is 16 bits. So it's two bytes that allow has to be a read write memory buffer. So if again, if you look at the parameter, then we can do that easily. You can see it's read write stream. So if you try to put something which is constant there, and that constant may be something like notepad directly, what you'll get is an access violation in run application, because this buffer needs to be read/write, because the create process function writes something back there into that same buffer, which eventually turns out to be the same thing that you've put in that buffer. So this is a kind of a weird behavior that has the POSIX PROIT has. So anyway, I just want to be aware of that. So that's why I have to put that in a read write memory and then I can finally use the name. And so I can also add the parameters if I wanted to but in this case we'll stick with node tag. Then we have two font sub parameters of type security attributes. Security attributes is a structure that is related to security obviously but not just to security. So for now I don't need any specific services from these structures, and I can pass now, which says some kind of default security. We discussed what different security means in module 7. And the next parameter is calling Harry Tenders, and this is a Boolean that signifies whether I want Handers for my process to be inherited into the new process or copied to the new process. This is one way of sharing kernel objects between processes. And so we discussed that in module 4. Now I'm going to just say false here. Then we have a bunch of creation flags. There is a long list of flags for create process. Let me describe just a few of them. So one of them is called create suspended. So create suspended means I want to create the process and the thread, but I don't want the thread to start execution just yet, because I want to make some preparations for other things to happen before I call the resume thread function to resume the main thread in the process. So that's one option. Another set of flags has to do with the priority class or base priority of the process, so that's one option. Another set of flags has to do with the priority class or base priority of the process. That's the property I mentioned earlier. So for example, I can say I want this to run in the high priority class. If I specify 0, that would be the normal priority class, which is the default. And so this is another set of flags I can specify here. And there are many others. We'll take a look at a few more along the default. And so this is another set of flags I can specify here. And there are many others. We'll take a look at a few more along the way. So I'm going to use a 0 for now. And next, we have a pointer called environment. This is an environment block. This is where you can specify environment variables that the new process will use. So we can actually specify a string block with the format something equals something, and then each of these variables would be known to the new process. Or we can simply specify null, which says, let's just copy the environment block from this process to the new process. The next parameter is the current directory. This is the directory I mentioned earlier in the search path. So here I am as the parent of the new process, can specify what should be the default current directory for that is also used in the search for DLS. So in some cases you may find this as a working directory in terms of how it's called. So for instance if you create a shortcut on the desktop there's a parameter called working directory. And this is what this really means. And so when explorer invokes that shortcut it uses create process and sets that working directory as the current directory of the new process. So this is exactly the same thing. This is how it's done using Explorer for instance. So in this case, I'm going to specify null, which means it's going to be copying my current directory to the new processes current directory because it doesn't matter for our, as this particular demonstration. In finding, we have two structure parameters here. One of them is called startup info. The other one is called process information. The first one is an input structure and the second one is an output. So the startup info, the structure I have to create and initialize. And the first member of the structure, let me show that in detail first, is called a CB, which should be initialized to the size of the structure. And before that, the structure should be zeroed out. Otherwise, it would take garbage, and that would confuse great process, causing it to fail. And so I need to sort of zero out the structure itself, and then initialize the first member only to the size of the structure. This scheme of using the first member as the size of a structure is used as a versioning information. And so if a structure is expanded in the future, then existing code will not know about that extra size. And so the Windows APIs can look only at the size that is specified as known by the function. And so this is a very common technique that is using many Windows structures. So we can do all that actually in a single line by using something that the C and language provides. We can just initialize the first member, which is always the size, and by automatically because of the C standards, the rest of the members are zero-doubt automatically. So just a quicker way to do that. So this is an input structure and has quite a few members which we can customize more stuff about the process. In this case I'm not going to customize anything, just leave the default with 0 as they are. And finally we have the last structure called process information and this is an output structure, so I don't need to initialize that. I just need to pass it along as the last parameter. And that structure contains our results. And the structure has four members. It returns the process and thread you need to use throughout the system. And two open handles to the process and the thread. And the function itself returns the Boolean, which is also very common in the Windows API. And if it's true, then the process was created successfully. Otherwise, it failed. So I can say something like, if created equals two, I can say process, or in this case, no pattern just called processing. To be more generic, created successfully. And I can also display the process ID. By digging into the process information structure, and we see there's a DW process ID member here, which is the unique process ID, which of course can correlate with task manager or other tools. And technically, we're done. And the good thing to do here is to use the close handle function to close the handles of both the process and the thread. This is a good habit to have, even though, in this case, the application is going to be finished very quickly. And so the handles are going to be closed by the kernel. Anyway, still, it's a good habit to have So if it fails for whatever reason then something Wrong happened so I can say there's been an error and I can display that error by using the get last error function This is the normal function to use when some error occurs and a function returns a Boolean you want to get more information Then you can use the get last error function In this case there's no point in closing any handles because they were not created So that's all they actually have to do So if I build that I can build that as a 64bbit or a 32-bit doesn't really matter. So, main, it's a warning that I should use "A" and not "void" because that's a nicer nevermind, let's just go ahead and return zero here. And now if I run it, what we see is that notepad comes up. Notpad comes up is the console window that I got appearing on my other screen. We can see the process was created successfully. And the process ID is this particular value. And if you go to test manager and locate nodepad-- so I actually have another nodepad that was open here previously. So here's that 12.5. 1, 2 process ID that was created just fine here. So that's a simple example of how to create a process. Let me continue this example a little bit more. So let me first get rid of all the notepad hanging around here. And what I want to do here before closing the handles, I can do something that the slides demonstrate, which is waiting until the process that I've created terminates. So I can use a function called wait for single object, which is a generic function that allows us to wait until a kernel object becomes signal, and we'll discuss this function more detail in module four. And so I'm waiting until the handle of that process that represents this process becomes signal. So I'm using here the infinite timeout, which says I'm willing to wait as long as it takes and we'll try other values in a moment. So this causes the current thread, the creator thread here, to get into a weight state, not wasting any CPU cycles until notepad is terminated. So at this point, once the weight completes, I am certain notepad has been terminated for whatever reason. So I can say, notepad terminated and that's for sure. There's no doubt about it. So we can test that out. Let me run that. And again, and no pad appears, it's no pad. And here is my console window. So now my application demo one is still running. So the thread is now waiting until notepad 10. So if I go ahead and just kill notepad in whatever way, I'll get the notepad terminated message right here. And so instead of waiting, infinitely, I can wait a limited amount of time, a finite amount of time, let's say 10 seconds. So the value here is in milliseconds. So in this case, I get back some return value. And that return value should give me an idea why the weight was over. So if not that, 10 minutes before these 10 seconds elapsed, I'm going to get one value. And if not, I'm going to get a different value. So let's look at the values real quick. So one of the things is called weight object 0. This means that the object became signal. And so this means for a process that the process terminated. So I can write something like this. Otherwise, the return will be something like weight time out. That means notepad is still a lifelike and say something like notepad still running. Because after 10 seconds it was still in the system. So again I can test it out just by running it again. So here's my notepad. If I write at least 10 seconds, then we'll see the rate will be over and I'll get the message notepad still running. As we see here. If I go ahead and try this again, and this time I'm going to close note at before 10 seconds elapsed. I get note pad terminated immediately. So the rate ends prematurely before these 10 seconds are up. So this is just a few simple examples to let you understand what we're up against. And so this handle to process that we get back is all powerful handles. So it has all the possible access to the process. And so we can do anything we want with that process, such as terminated, for instance, abruptly. I can do that. So I can actually do something like sleep, let's wait for, let's say, 10 seconds. And then I can call the terminate process function, using that handle that I got back, because the creator always gets an all-powerful handle. So now it's going to be terminated premature. So let's try that out real quick. So here is my window and after 10 seconds, no touch go away automatically without me having to touch anything. And it went away. And so after that terminated process call, we can see that wait for single object actually succeeded automatically because the process was terminated. So we got this terminated notification as well. So no waiting was actually done using this function because at that point in time, the process was already gone. So I hope this is clear. Those of you that already know that maybe we're bored for the past few minutes. But if you haven't seen that, that's a good thing, again, good skill to have, even if you're not a developer in your full-time job, it's a good idea to be able to try out various APIs and see how they work. And so that's why I presented that. So for a process, the meaning of signand means that the process is terminated. So in this case, wait for a single object, for a process only means that the process doesn't have nothing else about it. So if we close the handles from Northpad, if the process is going to be terminated, that's actually a very good question. Maybe I can follow up on that after I call "terminate process." How is it possible I haven't valid handled to the process? What is happening around here? And so closing the handle doesn't kill any process because the kernel maintains another reference to the process. Conversely, once the process is terminated, what exactly is left of the process if I still have a handle? And so what happens is that the e-process structure is still there. And so I can query some information about the process. So for example, I can query the exit code of the process. So the exit code of the process is normally that none by returning from main. So I can say something of course, process terminated, get exit code and code process. Which kind of makes sense because querying that before the process is over is sort of silly because it's not exited yet. So I can only query that to have some meaningful answer when the process terminates, but I still have an open handle. So once I have an open handle, the e-process structure is still aligned. Only when they close that handle, then the e-process structure in the kernel will be destroyed, and there will be no way from now on to get access to that process. Okay, so closing a handle doesn't necessarily kill an object. In the case of process it never does because the kernel maintains another reference to the object. Okay, so I hope that's clear and of course we'll get more into objects and handles in module 4, I promise. Okay, so the code here in this slide is fairly similar to one I'm showing you right now. The change is that we can see the return value here uses weight time out as the check instead of weight object zero. So check whether the process is still alive after 10 seconds instead of the other way around, but it doesn't really matter. Okay, so I think it's a good time to take 15 in a break and then we'll resume.